# About the publication

> Information wants to be free. Information also wants to be expensive.
> Information wants to be free because it has become so cheap to
> distribute, copy, and recombine — too cheap to meter. It wants to be
> expensive because it can be immeasurably valuable to the recipient.
> That tension will not go away. It leads to endless wrenching debate
> about price, copyright, “intellectual property”, the moral rightness
> of casual distribution, because each round of new devices makes the
> tension worse, not better.
>
> —  Stewart Brand The Media Lab - Inventing the Future at M.I.T.

The tension underlying the value of information translates into two
predominant software paradigms: Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) and
proprietary software. The criteria for differentiation are based on
control over the software/information. With proprietary software,
control tends to lie more with the vendor, while with Free and Open
Source Software, it tends to be more weighted towards the end user. But
even though the paradigms differ, they use the same copyright laws to
reach and enforce their goals. From a legal perspective, Free and Open
Source Software can be considered as software to which users generally
receive more rights via their license agreement than they would have
with a proprietary software license, yet the underlying license
mechanisms are the same.

However, as legal systems differ throughout the world there are
significant differences in how Free and Open Source Software licenses
are treated in different countries, and it can be difficult to obtain
reliable information on national interpretations. The IFOSS Law Book
engages with this issue by providing a clear yet thorough analysis of
Free and Open Source legal matters by national legal experts. The first
edition covered thirteen countries. This second edition adds four more
countries, bringing the number to seventeen and new editions will expand
over time to explore more. The purpose of the IFOSS Law Book is to
provide a clear, compelling and simple way for legal professionals,
students and academics, and broader policy makers, to contextualize the
ramifications and imperatives of the field in their own nation, and in
the nations of others. This lofty goal is supported by necessity; the
very nature of Free and Open Source Software assumes collaboration to
drive value, and such collaboration is by the nature of the Internet not
confined to national borders, yet it is simultaneously defined in legal
terms by their differing systems, laws and interpretations of best
practice in the management of creative goods.

The IFOSS Law Book does not endeavour to be the sole required reference
for legal aspects of Free and Open Source Software. Rather, it is
intended to become the place where legal experts confronted with a legal
question under a foreign jurisdiction can turn for an understanding on
how Free and Open Source Licenses are treated under that law. From this
starting point, experts can seek specific information or seek the advice
of a local legal counsel. In short, the IFOSS Law Book is positioned as
a bench mark reference that helps people quickly contextualize the key
issues in the field.

Finally, it is important to point out that the IFOSS Law Book is not
written for those who endorse FOSS for ideological or practical reasons.
The publication is targeted towards all those that encounter FOSS in
their profession.

## Free Software or Open Source Software

The Free Software and the Open Source Software movements largely pursue
similar goals and endorse similar software licences. But historically,
both movements carry different emphases. Where the “Free Software”
movement focuses on the rights (the four freedoms) which Free Software
provides to its users, the “Open Source Software” movement points to its
Open Source Definition and the advantages of peer-to-peer software
development. The IFOSS Law Book does not endorse any emphasis. It uses
the term Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) to cover both Free
Software and Open Source Software.

## FOSS licences

The goals of FOSS are realised through licences governed by copyright
law. These licences tend to take an unusual form compared to traditional
proprietary documents. Instead of providing a narrow grant of use with a
long list of exceptions and restrictions, FOSS licences provide a broad
grant of use with few restrictions. These licences are often divided
into three categories: non-Copyleft, weak-Copyleft and strong-Copyleft.
It is the analysis of these licenses under local copyright law by local
legal experts that lies at the heart of the IFOSS Law Book.

## Working method

This law book is a product of its time. Its management is distributed
across three countries and two continents, while its contributors are
linked through technology as much — if not more — than their formal
legal positions and firms. The two threads underlying the organization
of the publication are that the book itself will provide a neutral and
lasting reference, while the local chapters will be developed in a
flexible enough manner to accurately reflect the state of the art
regarding interpretation for the nation in question. As such the book
actually has two forms; an “evolving” form based at
<http://www.ifosslawbook.org/> that sees each chapter continually
refined and provides a mechanism for any reader to contribute notes and
clarifications as necessary, and a “complete” form that is physically
published through Open Source Press, Germany.

Like any work of reference, this book is intended to be accurate and
trustworthy, and it employs several methods to deliver the highest level
of fidelity in this regard. The first and foremost is the careful
selection of chapter authors. All of the initial authors are
experienced, driven professionals sourced from the European Legal
Network, the largest network of its kind, and the primary global
resource for Free and Open Source Software legal knowledge as of 2014.
The second method is to openly and continuously invite the broader
network to review, comment and improve the chapter texts, positioning
the publication in clear terms as an open reference intended to benefit
all. The third and by no means least important method is to ensure that
third party experts — be they legal professionals, technical experts or
from another field altogether — can easily register and provide feedback
on chapters and the book itself through the main website.

The governance of the IFOSS Law Book is currently limited to a handful
of parties. As the publication progresses, it will develop a formal
governance structure based on maintaining objective analysis, improving
its potential for sustainability and ensuring fair representation for
diverse legal and social systems. This governance will be drawn from
existing contributors, the network from which they originate and from
the example set by other publications in this field. As with all other
aspects of this publication, contributions towards its development is
welcomed from all interested parties.

The IFOSS Law Book currently provides three forms of information for
each country covered:

-   An introduction to software protection (in general) in the nation

-   A general analysis of FOSS under local legislation

-   A overview of local FOSS cases (if any)

The second edition is edited by Ywein Van den Brande, Shane Coughlan and
Till Jaeger.

## License

The IFOSS Law Book as a whole is published under a CC-BY-ND license. The
text can be freely copied and shared by any party under these
conditions. Physical copies may be purchased, but it is also available
at no cost in electronic form at our website.

## Conclusion

FOSS is no longer a new, challenging and unproven method regulating the
creation, use and redistribution of creative goods for digital purposes.
In the past twenty five years it has matured into an accepted, proven
and compelling proposition for commercial and non-commercial entities
alike, delivering value in terms of both productivity and economic
activity. As it has matured, so too has the legal understanding
regarding its use on a nation by nation basis. The first edition of the
IFOSS Law Book contributed hereto with a comprehensive overview of the
understanding of FOSS under the legislation of thirteen countries.

It is with this in view that the editors present this second edition of
the International Free and Open Source Software Law Book (IFOSS Law
Book) that covers four more countries. We hope and expect that it will
provide a useful and trusted source for users and advisors seeking
information on Free and Open Source Software issues under foreign
legislations.

Enjoy the book.

Ywein Van den Brande — Shane Coughlan — Till Jaeger

July 2014

