# China

*Yang Xia[^china_bio]*

## Introduction to software protection under Chinese law

### Body of law

The regulations contained in the “The People’s Republic of China
Copyright Law” are formulated to protect the rights of copyright owners,
to safeguard interests in the development, dissemination and use of
computer software, to encourage the development and application of
computer software, and to promote the software industry and the
development of information technology in the context of the national
economy.

The key legal regulation in the context of software is the general
Copyright Act. While there is a Software Act, it is a special statute in
relation to the general Copyright Act, and as such does not contain any
specific provisions above and beyond its terms.

### Software Act: Object of protection

Computer programs and preparatory material related to their development
are protected by copyright and are equivalent to literary works within
the meaning of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works. According to the Copyright Law, only original computer
programs enjoy copyright protection. This means that a computer program
has to be an original intellectual creation of its author. No other
criteria may be used to determine whether the program is subject to
copyright protection. The ideas and principles behind computer programs
or technical interfaces are explicitly denied copyright protection.

The term computer software (hereinafter referred to as software) refers
to computer programs and related documentation.

The relevant terms are defined as follows:

(a) A computer program is the code sequence used by computers or other
devices capable of processing information, or a sequence of symbolic
instructions or statements which can be automatically converted into a
sequence of coded instructions. The source code and object code is of
the same program.

(b) A document contains the text data and charts used to describe the
computer program’s contents, composition, design, functional
specifications, development and test results, such as details of the
program design, flow charts, user manuals, and so on.

Software protection under these regulations must be independently
developed acquired by the developer, and relates to a specific tangible
object.

Legislation on copyright protection for software does not extend to the
ideas used in software development, processing, and methods of operation
or mathematical concepts and suchlike.

### Authors/Beneficiaries

The relevant terms are defined as follows:

(a) A software developer can be a legal entity or organization
responsible for the actual organizational development, direct
development and software development; or can be an individual person
responsible for the independent software completed by their own effort.

(b) A software copyright owner is an individual person, a legal entity
or an organization that enjoys the copyright in accordance with this
regulation.

Chinese citizens, legal entities or organizations enjoy copyright in
accordance with this regulation regardless of whether their software is
published or not. Foreigners and stateless persons enjoy copyright in
accordance with these regulations if their software is first published
in China. Foreigners and stateless persons also enjoy copyright
protection under these regulations if the developer is a resident of a
state that has signed an agreement with China or an international treaty
to which China is a signatory.

Software copyright by default belongs to the software developer unless
otherwise stated. If there is no proof to the contrary, the individual
person, legal entity or organization holding the copyright is therefore
deemed the developer whose name is on the software.

If the software is developed by two or more individual persons, legal
entities or organizations, the co-ownership of the copyright is
stipulated by a written contract.

If there is no written contract to describe ownership and rights, or the
contract is not clearly defined, the jointly developed software can be
used separately and the developers of each respective part may be
entitled to independent copyright. However, the copyright protection
afforded in this context does not extend to the entire software
developed. If a situation where co-developed software cannot be divided
and no contract or other form of mutual agreement exists between the
co-developers, then no single developer may prevent the other developers
from exercising their rights apart from the right of transfer, but the
benefits have to be fairly distributed amongst all the co-developers.

### Exclusive rights

Software copyright holders enjoy the following rights:

(a) Publication right

(b) The right of authorship

(c) Amendment right

(d) Reproduction right

(e) Distribution right

(f) Lending right

(g) Right to network Dissemination of information

(h) Translation right

According to the second paragraph of Article 10 of the Copyright Law, if
the copyright holders allow others to exercise their rights, they are
entitled to payment in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
contract. By the same token, the owner of a software copyright may
authorize others to exercise his or her software copyright and the right
to receive remuneration, or fully transfer that copyright or
renumeration right.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights

Owners of lawful copies of software enjoy the following rights:

(a) The right to install the software on a computer and other devices
capable of processing information;

(b) The right to make backup copies to prevent losses. These backup
copies may not be made available to others for use by any means, and the
owner must destroy the backup copies if he or she loses proprietorship
of the lawful copy of the software;

(c) To use the computer application software and to improve its
functionality and performance by making necessary modifications;
however, unless otherwise provided, without permission from the software
copyright owner the modified software may not be supplied to any third
party;

In order to study and research the inner design and principle of a
computer program, involving its installation, display, transmission,
storage or other use, the granting of software copyright permission is
subject to payment of remuneration.

To authorize others to exercise activities covered by software copyright
restrictions, the parties have to enter into a written contract. If
there is no written contract or agreement expressly stipulating an
exclusive license, the right to exercise the copyright has to be treated
as non-proprietary.

There are cases where such contracts are not necessary. Article 30 of
the Computer Software Act explains the circumstances in which a
copyright holder’s authorization is not required for reproducing and/or
translating a computer program in order to obtain interoperability
information.

Article 30 is compulsory law, and contractual provisions to the contrary
are deemed not to exist. However, exercising these statutory rights is
often difficult in practice because the licensee generally has no access
to the source code of the application, and it is not legal to enforce
source code access for the purposes of interoperability.

### Dispute mediation

The software copyright infringement dispute may be mediated. If the
mediation is inadequate or the mediation achieves the agreement latter
side to renege on the mediation promise, they can go to the People’s
court to carry on litigation. If the litigant is not willing to mediate,
may also go directly to the People’s court.

### Term of protection

The software copyright’s protection period is 25 years, beginning from
the initial publication of the software and ending on December 31 of the
25th year following. Before the expiration date of the protection, the
software copyright owner may apply to the software registration
management organization to get another 25 years, but the total
protection period afforded to any software product cannot surpass 50
years.

### Special measures

When the owner of copyright is not able to protect his or her rights
related to software provided in an infringing manner, the end recipient
of the illegal code still has a duty to destroy or otherwise cease use
of the code once they are made aware of the situation. However, they
have recourse to seek compensation for this loss and its ancillary
consequences from the original supplier of the infringing code.

## Unprotected software and non-commercial software

Software that is an intellectual creation of the author is regarded as
original and can obtain copyright protection, while non-original
software is excluded from such protection. Third party revision or
sharing without agreement from the software copyright owner or their
legitimate successor is prohibited.

Teaching activities, scientific research, and government agencies
operating official functions can use software for non-commercial
purposes; these non-commercial rights include the ability to make free
copies of the software without the copyright owner or its legitimate
successor’s agreement. However, the software’s name must be correctly
mentioned in use and the exploiter should not infringe upon other rights
which the owner and its legitimate successor enjoy. Additionally, after
the copied software has completed its non-commercial use, it should be
reclaimed or be destroyed properly and must not be used for other goals
or be given to other people.

## Unprotected software and public domain software

Only software that is an intellectual creation of the author can obtain
copyright protection. Non-original software does not come into
consideration for copyright protection and can, in principle, be used
freely.

Under Chinese law, public domain software is considered as software to
which the author has given up all rights and on which no other party is
able to enforce any rights. This software can be used, reproduced or
executed freely without obtaining permission from a rights holder or the
payment of a fee to such a party or their representatives. Public domain
software may in certain cases even be presented by third parties as
their own work, and by modifying the original work, third parties can
take certain versions of such code out of the public domain again.

The underlying principle is that software value can only be achieved
through protection granted by intellectual property law. Under the
general law in this field, value is presented by granting certain
exclusive rights to the legal owner of a work, who may realize fiscal or
other returns through contracts with third parties, with the proviso
that such rights eventually cease and the work enters the public domain.
This creates a circle of economic activity that supports industrial and
economic development.

Proprietary software and open source software (free software) differ
only in terms of their circulation mechanism, and not in terms of the
applicability of Copyright.

## Analysis of FOSS under Chinese law

### Copyrights

From the view of most enterprises, software development differs from
traditional creation of copyrighted work. It is no longer subject to a
single person or even an organization. With the development of the
Internet, very few people operate behind closed doors in the software
industry. Building on the ideas and experience of predecessors' has
become a crucial factor to the development of software technology.

#### Qualification of FOSS

Copyright law in China operates under the principle of “self-executing”
protection. After a creative good is completed it is automatically
subject to copyright protection regardless of whether it is published or
registered. The right to publish source code — an intrinsically
important part of the FOSS — belongs to the software’s “publication
right” range. The protections of software copyright may be considered as
a mix of applicable law and contracts between the rights holder and any
third parties. This model is from the province of international
conventions and national copyright laws of the US, and the protection of
software copyright law in China is no exception.

One pertinent example is that the Chinese government issued a special
regulation on software copyright protection as part of the Copyright Law
with the subject “Computer Software Protection Regulations”. This
provides that without the copyright owner or his legal transferee’s
consent the use of software is equal to copyright infringement; in the
“Computer Software Protection Regulations” Article 18 and 19 the
provision of software licenses and transfer of rights must be in the
form of a written agreement. In this sense, protection of software
copyright in China and international copyright norms are virtually
identical.

Article 12 of the Copyright law of the people’s republic of China states
that where a work is created by adaptation, translation, annotation or
arrangement of pre-existing work, the copyright in the work shall be
enjoyed by the adaptor, translator or arranger, provided that the
exercise of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright of the
original work. Interpretation of the original author should be via their
consent and include remuneration, while right of authorship remaining
with that party. If the interpretation is created out the period of
protection for creative works, it should be with the original author’s
consent, but no remuneration is necessary. Naturally the original work
shall not be violated or distorted in the process of interpretation.

Article 13 of the Copyright law provides for co-ownership of copyrighted
works, covering situations where a work is created jointly by two or
more co-authors. Put simply, in these cases copyright in the work shall
be enjoyed jointly by those co-authors while any person who has not
participated in the creation of the work may not claim co-authorship. If
a work of joint authorship can be separated into independent parts and
exploited separately, each co-author may be entitled to independent
copyright in the parts they have created, provided that the exercise of
such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright in the work as a whole.
The general consideration is that the creation of a work of joint
authorship requires cooperation and arrangement between the authors. If
one party does not get consent from the other, then each party only has
copyright and its attendant right of modification or distribution in
their own section of the work.

#### Rights of the original co-authors

“Participation” in co-authorship refers to expression in the form of a
creative and intellectual work applied either in conceptual planning or
writing operations. If a party does not do creative work that falls
under this definition of participation, then they cannot become regarded
as a joint author. This participation and its attendant copyright in the
work of joint authorship can be further regarded in two different ways,
either with the whole coauthored work taking a form that can be split
into individually authored sections or a form that cannot be split into
separate parts. The ability to distinguish individual contributions as
opposed to entirely combined contributions naturally has implications
for personal rights and property rights and their exercise in market
transactions.

Unless the components of software can be clearly distinguished, it is
almost certainly going to be defined as an “indivisible work” under
Chinese law. These are works whereby it cannot be concluded clearly what
the individual contribution of every author is, e.g. when two authors
write the source code together.

Where a work is created jointly by two or more co-authors, the copyright
in the work shall be enjoyed jointly by those co-authors. Any person who
has not participated in the creation of the work may not claim the co-
authorship.

If a work of joint authorship can be separated into independent parts
and exploited separately, each co-author may be entitled to independent
copyright in the parts that he has created, provided that the exercise
of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright in the joint work as
a whole.

On the other side, if a work of joint authorship can’t be separated into
independent parts and exploited separately, the copyright in the work
shall be enjoyed jointly by those co-authors, in which case the authors
are free to regulate the exercise of the copyrights by agreement. If
they can’t reach any kinds of agreements relating to the moral rights
and have no cogent reasons, No party shall prevent exercise of the
rights except for the transfer request, but the proceeds should
distribute to all the other parties with attendant rights.

#### Authors of derivative works

FOSS often falls under the category of a derivative or composed work.
Derivative works and composed works are works whose originality may be
definable, but whose existence depends on existing work(s), from which
at least some original characteristics are copied.

Where a work is created by adaptation, translation, annotation or
arrangement of a pre-existing work, the copyright in this work thus
created shall be enjoyed by the adaptor, translator or arranger,
provided that the exercise of such copyright shall not prejudice the
copyright in the original work.

The copyright in a work created by compilation shall be enjoyed by the
compiler, provided that the exercise of such copyright shall not
prejudice the copyright in the pre-existing works included in the
compilation. The authors of such works included in a compilation as can
be exploited separately shall be entitled to exercise their copyright in
their works independently.

So, the author(s) of the derivative or composed work are the only
persons with a copyright on their work. This is not independent and full
copyright, which is restricted, however, because the derivative or
composed work cannot be operated without the consent of the holder of
the copyright on the original work. In the case of FOSS licenses such
consent is not a problem, subject to respecting the terms and conditions
(e.g. regarding further distribution of the derivative work).

#### The assignment of copyrights

In order to control the rights related to a specific FOSS project, it
may be useful to collect all copyrights concerning this project within
one organization. The existence of such an organization can simplify the
management and enforcement of joint rights, with the collective
management of copyrights is usually, but not necessarily, regulated by
the fiduciary transfer of copyrights. This assignment is relatively
trivial, with ownership of copyright in a commissioned work being
assigned via contract between the commissioning and the commissioned
parties. In the absence of a contract or of an explicit agreement in the
contract, the copyright in such a work shall belong to the commissioned
party.

### Moral copyrights

FOSS originated in America, and therefore attaches less importance to
the moral rights of the author than it might under a country governed by
Civil Law. The Open Source Definition specifies that the author of
software distributed under a FOSS license cannot oppose the use of the
software by certain people and groups or for certain areas of
application.

For example, according to article 22, in some cases, a work may be used
without permission from, and without payment of remuneration to, the
copyright owner, provided that the name of the author and the title of
the work shall be indicated and the other rights enjoyed by the
copyright owner by virtue of this Law shall not be prejudiced.
Furthermore, article 23 specifies the statutory license of copyright.

Whether an author is able to give up all his rights on a work is more
complex under Chinese law, as such law contains the principal
indefeasibility of the moral rights. Although renouncement of moral
rights is possible in principle, the global renouncement of the future
exercise of moral rights is void, and this naturally also applies to
moral rights on software.

The author of a work distributed under the FOSS license shall therefore
probably be able to oppose any use of his work by people or groups or
for certain purposes which affects his honour or reputation, based on
his moral rights.

Moral rights are reflected in derivative works. The author of the
original work will therefore, based on his moral rights, not only be
able to oppose the use by third parties of his work, but also the use of
derivative works which affect his honour or reputation.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses

The question whether a FOSS license can be enforced depends on whether a
valid license was issued. The essential questions are: (i) between whom
is a license granted, and (ii) has the license been validly granted?

#### Contracting parties

In China, the Contract Law governs all kinds of licenses, but it can be
questioned whether FOSS licenses fall into the sphere of the Contract
Law of China. There is no clear stipulation about FOSS licenses in its
wording, and no case has yet came before the People’s court to provide a
ruling about the validity of the license. Pending this, a more general
interpretation in view of existing rules and norms may be proposed.A
creative work that needs two or more people to complete normally
involves an agreement to arrange copyright allocation or grants. If one
author makes his work available under a FOSS license, the answer is
clear: the license is reached between the licensee and the author. But
in some cases, the works are finished by different people and they are
all contributed to the programs. At this time, the question becomes more
complicated. With whom the licensee reaches a contract depends on the
different cooperation methods applied by the co-authors.

If a work of joint authorship can be separated into independent parts
and exploited separately, each co-author may be entitled to independent
copyright in the parts that he has created, provided that the exercise
of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright in the joint work as
a whole. This would allow for the author who created the independent
parts to grant a license to contracting parties based on his or her
individual section of the work. Meanwhile, if the work cannot be
separated in such a fashion, and the authors do not collectively agree
on general license terms, a license and implied contract should be
reached between the licensee and every author of the program.

Most FOSS licenses solve this through agreements such as BSD, Apache and
GPL licenses. For example, the GPL creates a contractual bond between
the licensee and all authors in the chain. GPL version 3 contains the
following clause: “Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient
automatically receives a license from the original licensors, to run,
modify and propagate that work, subject to this License” and GPL version
2 states that “each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based
on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor…” While apparently effective in US and other markets
and internally consistent with the rest of the license, it is not clear
that this construction will be regarded valid under China Copyright Law.

#### Validity of the FOSS licenses

An author chooses a FOSS license because he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others — possibly with certain restrictions.
For him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions. However,
the status of FOSS author rights in China is not entirely clear.

The most common use of FOSS code development and therefore the
application of the licenses is through the internet. While conventional
IT agreements are reached by the explicit acceptance of the terms and
conditions by the licensee following the signing of the terms and
conditions, FOSS software is made available with some simple
specification on a website or in the source code form that it concerns
FOSS. The license usually does not need to be explicitly accepted. In
other words, the act of opening the packaging or clicking “I agree”
button — methods to reach a licensing agreement are generally considered
to be valid and are covered by “The electronic signature law of the
People’s Republic of China” — tend not to apply with FOSS.

Having to click and confirm every time could in some cases interfere
with the use of the software, according to the international common
practice. The Open Source Definition opposes demanding explicit
agreement with the license conditions with the aim of confirming the
agreement between licensor and licensee.

The question is whether in these cases a valid license is possible. The
answer to this question is not clear under Chinese law. The reason is
that the user of a copyright protected work needs to be able to indicate
the grounds on which he is able to use the work. FOSS is still under the
protection of present copyright law and using the software without the
author’s consent implies a copyright infringement, with the implication
that everyone who wants to use software which they find via the
internet, they should actively look for the license, at least if they
know such software will be under the terms of a license. If the user
cannot prove that they elected obey the license, they must refrain from
using it. But without a mechanism to do so, a potential grey area
exists.Of course it is doubtful whether a user would benefit from
disputing the existence of a FOSS license. If the user disputes the
conclusion of the FOSS license, this implies no legally valid copyright
license was granted and the user therefore is not allowed to use the
software. Renouncement of copyrights should not be open to conjecture,
but needs to be proven. The availability of a work on the internet does
not mean it becomes public domain.

#### Validity of the contract

Rights holders can place contracts and any party violating the agreement
must assume responsibility for their actions. When an author chooses a
FOSS license it is relatively clear that he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others — possibly with certain restrictions.
For him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions.

The exception in China is that for public welfare or personal use,
people can accord to the principle of reasonable use, and do not need to
conclude contracts or pay any remuneration in this context. This does
not preclude the necessity of the authors and users signing a contract
for licensing, but may impact some of its scope. It would be expected
that such a contract would include licensing rights, whether licensing
right is exclusive or not, the scope and space of using, the
remuneration’s standards and methods if applicable and the events that
may be regarded as breach of contract.

Whatever the situation, the Regulation for Computer Software Protection
in China provides that the licensing of software copyright shall be in
possession of a contract for licensing. And the licensee may not
exercise the right that has not been licensed by the software copyright
owner in the contract for licensing.

Normally, rights holders in FOSS write programs collaboratively under a
license that permits users to use, change, copy, and distribute the
works free of charge, provided that they follow the licensing guidelines
of the software. This can cause some confusion because commercial
software doesn’t usually allow you to change a program and redistribute
it unless you specifically negotiate that in an additional license. But
in both cases if you make copies or distribute modified versions of the
software without permission, you infringe the copyright, and you must
take the responsibility. By implication when locating software on the
internet it is very important to explore what license is being used. If
the user can’t prove that he knows the content of the license applicable
to the work, he must refrain from using it, and cannot seek to assume
that no license or contract is in play. Only in cases where the terms
applied to the contract are manifestly unfair can a move be taken to
void its applicability.

### Waiver and liability

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong exoneration clauses, which
discharge the author from all liability. The reason for this is that
FOSS is often made available without a fee, as a result of which the
author generates insufficient income to pay for liability insurances and
legal costs. In China, the validity of this clause is not entirely
clear, with the reason being questions that arise about the extent to
which such exoneration clauses comply with the general validity
requirements under Chinese law due to the existence of no specific legal
regulation of FOSS licenses. Liability requirements are scattered in
Chinese civil law, with an example being that Article 53 of the contract
law of PRC states that the following types of exoneration in contracts
are invalid:

(i) that causes the personal injury,

(ii) that causes property loss by intentional misconduct or gross
negligence.

Meanwhile, Article 52 in the contract law stipulates: if only there is
one of following state, the contract shall be invalid:

(i) obtain the contract by means of fraud or stress, at the same time
causes damage to the interests of the state.

(ii) viciously collude, to damage the interests of the state, the
collective, or a third party.

(iii) use legal form to cover up illegal purpose.

(iv) do harm to the public interests. And

(v) And violate the compulsory laws or administrative rules.

Generally speaking when considering FOSS license as a form of civil
contract, all the regulations of the contract behaviour are available
for the FOSS license. But with such licenses being quite different from
typical contracts there remain areas of differing potential
interpretation and therefore potential confusion. One remedy in the mid
to long-term is to add FOSS licenses as a special form of contracts in
the contract law of PRC.

Chinese legislation doesn’t normally perceive a large difference between
guarantee liability from amateur and professional sellers, but there are
some considerations to take into account regarding FOSS. Theoretically,
there is difference if the stipulating party be considered as a
professional seller. The professional seller is deemed to know the
defect in the software, and in pursuance of article 153 of the contract
law of PRC, contractual provisions of non- indemnity for surface or
hidden quality defects have no effect if the seller knew about the
defect at the time of the sale. Additionally, according to Article 150,
the seller has the duty to guarantee defects. The professional seller of
FOSS will therefore be liable in principle for issues with FOSS code
provided unless he can also provide proof of ignorance regarding
defects. Such proof may be hard to provide.

### The copyleft principle

#### Principle

A characteristic found in many FOSS licenses is the so-called “copyleft”
principle, which is a new and different way of enforcing copyright in
software. FOSS licenses which incorporate the copyleft principle lay
down by contract that everyone in the chain of consecutive users, in
return for the right of use that is assigned, needs to distribute the
improvements he makes to the software and the derivative works he makes
under the same conditions to other users as those under which he
received the original work. In other words, software which incorporates
copyleft FOSS needs to be distributed as copyleft FOSS. FOSS means
sharing with each other, instead of monopolizing.

This has the consequence that it is not possible to incorporate
copyright protected parts of copyleft software in proprietary licensed
work directly.The copyleft principle can restrict the commercial
possibilities of the software, at least regarding business models or
product deployments that assume proprietary behaviour. Sometimes
warnings are issued for the dangers that companies could encounter if a
negligent or vindictive employee were to incorporate a piece of copyleft
code in the code of proprietary software and parties relatively new to
FOSS worry that a company would be obliged to make its proprietary
software available under a copyleft FOSS license. Although caution is
necessary regarding the use of the third party work, one can ask oneself
whether such scenarios are realistic under Chinese law. Copyright
protection is still strong and absolute in current Chinese legal system.
The sanction for incorporating copyleft code in proprietary software
will usually be restricted to a prohibition to distribute the software
which is in breach or the obligation to remove this piece of code from
the program. If the unlawful use has caused damage to the author, this
damage will need to be reimbursed, but not more than they actually
suffered damage. As such, the implications of copyleft are restricted to
normal measures of expected remedy under copyright law.

#### Validity

Questions regarding the validity and implications of copyleft clauses
coincide with questions regarding whether an author is able to validly
lay down how derivative works need to be distributed. The answer to this
question under Chinese law is not definitive.

The copyright owner or copyright-related right holders are able to lay
down the use of the work for a particular use, or link certain
conditions to this. Such a right was recognized and based on an
interpretation of Article 9 of the copyright law of 27 October 2001.
According to the rule, the copyright owner can determine the destination
of a work, to copy or distribute, to rent or to exhibit, to performance
or screening, etc. They also can license or transfer the rights, with an
example being that a copyright collective management organization can
claim in its own name for copyright owners, and can carry on lawsuit and
arbitration activities as copyrights owner.

The right to determine the destination not only applies inter partes,
but “erga omnes”, provided that the third parties, in all
reasonableness, should know what the destination is. The author can
therefore lay down the copyleft condition based on his right to
determine the destination of his work, though aspects of derivative work
use/reuse may challenge this. According to the provisions of Article 12
of the copyright law, the author of the original work has no rights on
the derivative work; that’s to say “A work derived from adaptation,
translation, annotation or arrangement of a pre-existing work, the
copyrights belongs to the author of the derivative work which be
operated doesn’t subject to the consent of the copyright owner of the
original work, but the exercise of such copyright shall not infringe the
copyright in the original work”.

In summary, all rights are subject to abuse, including the copyright. An
author can therefore not randomly exercise his economic and moral
rights. A lawful tangible or moral interest needs to be proven. The
implications of Article 9 are in no measure overridden by those of
Article 12, but the applicability of both will probably have an impact
in any case involving right of use issues and FOSS licenses in a court
of law.

The traditional use of copyrighted work in China would see approval from
a right holder subject to some form of remuneration, and the simple
outcome that other situations probably constitute infringement. But
licensing a work under a copyleft restriction will in principle not
constitute an abuse of rights, and with “reasonable use”, you can make
use of the work without the consent of the copyright holder and without
the need to pay remuneration. Of course, the licensing or assignment
contract of the copyright owner has not explicitly been transferred, and
you can’t randomly exercise the rights without the consent of the
copyright owner, otherwise will constitute infringement.

Viewed formally under Chinese law, a FOSS license is a contract.
According to the contract law, it is effective as long as the parties
signed the contract voluntarily, it contains no violation of the
mandatory regulations applicable to contracts, and if the parties
strictly obey the law to exercise rights and perform obligations. A
legitimate moral interest applied by a rights holder could be the
decision to keep his work within the FOSS community, also in a
derivative format, through the measure known as copyleft. Companies
which have constructed a business model around distributing software
under copyleft restrictions will usually be able to prove the existence
of a legitimate interest.

### Damages

Damage caused by copyright violations are compensated under copyright
law in accordance with the general civil liability of the illegal act.
This implies that the injured party of a copyright breach needs to be
compensated.

According to the provisions in Article 47 of the copyright law the
copyright administration has the rights to stop the infringement,
confiscate the illegal income, destroy the infringing reproductions, and
may impose fines under the condition of infringing the public interests.
If the circumstances are serious, they also can confiscate materials,
tools, and other equipment which was used for making infringing
reproductions. The one who infringe the copyright can be considered as
constituting a crime, and shall bear criminal responsibility.

According to Article 36 of the regulations of copyright law of 2 August
2002, parties who have violated Article 47 of the copyright law and also
offended public interest should be punished with a fine that is 3 times
of the income of the illegal operation or 10 thousand Yuan if the income
of the illegal operation is difficult to calculate.

Infringements of software copyright are regarded in the same light as
infringements of every other copyright. The aforementioned principle is
therefore applicable in case of copyright infringements of software.

Additionally, according to the provisions in article 23 and article 24
of the software protection regulations, all actions which have infringed
the software copyright should hold the following civil liabilities:

1.  Stop the infringement

2.  Eliminate the bad effects

3.  Apologize

4.  Compensation for the losses

5.  Civil sanctions.

FOSS essentially seeks to provide software as the effective public
intellectual property of all mankind, and allows for sure software to be
distributed freely between the persons of preparation and application.
Any restrictions of the intellectual property rights will eventually
limit and obstruct its development.

Therefore certain legal experts may assume that the damage to the
copyright owner will be limited, as he has made his work freely
available via the internet.

However, the essence of FOSS is not free, but “thought sharing,
knowledge sharing and resource sharing”. The user can freely operate,
copy, distribute, research and improvement the software, and avoid the
intervening from the proprietary software. One can modify the program to
make it better, make it more applicable. One can experience the
excitement which comes from the achievement which be improved more
efficiency. But one retains certain obligations to all others.

Besides establishing a reputation and recognition with the related value
creation, an author can have other reasons to make his work “freely
available”. The author may also have a direct monetary advantage from
the free distribution of his work. The simplest way is circulating the
free works f advertising. Another way is granting specific services to
support the software. Taking this further into a specific economic
example, the free circulation of the work can provide that it has as
many users as possible, allowing the author to generate income from the
provision of technological support and consulting services, or
“licensing proprietary add-ons”. Another business model is the so-called
dual licensing model. This model uses — as the name allows us to
deduce — two different licenses. The first license is often a copyleft
license intended to provide a wide range of users. The second license
without the copyleft system can then leveraged to obtain payment from
interested parties who want to avoid the copyleft principle.

## FOSS cases in China

No cases have been reported yet (June 2011).

[^china_bio]: *Yang Xia is an associate professor at the Law School of Beijing Normal
University, one of the oldest universities in China. The main research
field of Mr. Yang Xia focuses on computer law, software law and high
technology law. Yang Xia teaches Science and Technology law, Computer
law, Intellectual Property law and Legal English. Yang Xia was awarded
the European Union Eramus Mundus scholarship for his studies at the EU
law center of the University of Warsaw and is member of CLAST (China Law
Association on Science and Technology). 
<http://www.bnu.edu.cn/eng/>*

