# France

*Fabrice Perbost[^france_bio1] and Alan Walter[^france_bio2]*

## Introduction to software protection under French law

### Body of law

Under article L. 112-2 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
software developments shall be considered as works of the mind and are,
as such, protected in France by copyright law.

The copyright protection of software is regulated by Law n° 94-361 of 10
May 1994, which implements Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991
on the legal protection of computer programs in France. It provides some
specific rules regarding software, which confirms and outlines the
applicability of the general principles of copyright law to such works.

### Scope of the protection

Under article L. 112-2 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
copyright law protects “software including preparatory design material”.
The Directive of 14 May 1991 defines such preparatory design material as
“preparatory design work leading to the development of a computer
program provided that the nature of the preparatory work is such that a
computer program can result from it at a later stage”.

Copyright law protects software that is original, regardless of its
kind, form of expression, merit or purpose. Thus, originality is the
sole criterion to consider when assessing whether a given piece of
software is subject to copyright protection, which implies that the
source and object code of software are protected in the same manner.

Generally, case law considers that a piece of software is original when
its author has brought a personal intellectual contribution[^france_1].

However, the ideas and principles, which underlie any element of
software, including those which underlie its interfaces, are not
protected by copyright.

### Authors/Beneficiaries

1.  As a rule, authorship shall belong to the natural person, who has
    created the software, whether the author is an employee or not.
    However, according to article L. 113-1 of the French Intellectual
    Property Code, it shall belong, unless otherwise proved, to the
    person or persons under whose name the work has been disclosed.

2.  Furthermore, article L. 113-9 of the French Intellectual Property
    Code provides that unless otherwise provided by statutory provisions
    or stipulations, the economic rights in the software and its
    documentation created by one or more employees in the execution of
    their duties or following the instructions given by their employer
    shall be the property of the employer and he exclusively shall be
    entitled to exercise them.  
    This provision also applies to the servants of the State, of local
    authorities and of public establishments of an
    administrative nature.

3.  Software created by two or more persons may be a “collective work”
    or a “collaborative work”.

    A collaborative work is a work in the creation of which more than
    one natural person has participated. It shall be the joint property
    of its authors.

    It differs from a collective work, which is a work created at the
    initiative of a natural or legal person, who edits it, publishes it
    and discloses it under his direction and name and in which the
    personal contributions of the various participating authors are
    merged in the overall work for which they were conceived, without it
    being possible to attribute to each author a separate right in the
    work as created. It shall be the property, unless otherwise proved,
    of the natural or legal person under whose name it has
    been disclosed.

4.  When a work integrates a preexisting work, without the collaboration
    of the author of the latter work, it is defined as a
    “Composite work”. A composite work shall be the property of the
    author who has produced it, subject to the rights of the author of
    the preexisting work, which means that the author of the composite
    work has to (a) obtain the consent of the author of the integrated
    work for such integration and (b) share the remuneration derived
    from the composite work with the author of the integrated work.

### Exclusive rights

According to article L. 122-6 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
the patrimonial rights belonging to the author of the software shall
include the right to do or to authorize:

-   any permanent or temporary reproduction of software by any means and
    in any form, in part or in whole;

-   any translation, adaptation, arrangement or any other alteration of
    software and the reproduction of the results thereof; and

-   any form of distribution to the public, including the rental, of the
    original software or of copies thereof.

The right of performance, as defined by article L 122-2 of the French
Intellectual Property Code, which is attached to any literary and
artistic work, is not expressly mentioned among the exclusive rights of
the author of a piece of software. However, this is not to say that the
software author does not enjoy such a right, which could apply to
software under certain circumstances, such as a filmed execution or an
online execution.

Reproduction shall consist of the physical fixation of a work by any
process allowing its communication to the public in an indirect way.
This may be through copying or recording onto any media. Insofar as
loading, displaying, running, transmitting or storing the software
necessitate such reproduction, such acts require the consent of the
author.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights

Similarly to the general copyright rules, the third paragraph of article
L. 122-6 of the French Intellectual Property Code provides that the
first sale of a copy of software on the territory of a Member State of
the European Community or of a State party to the agreement on the
European Economic Area by the author or with his consent shall exhaust
the right of placing on the market of that copy in all Member States,
with the exception of the right to authorize further rental of a copy.

Considering the specificity of software, article L. 122-6-1 also
provides some exceptions to the exclusive rights of the author.

The acts referred in article L. 122-6 shall not require the permission
of the author where they are necessary for the use of the software by
the person entitled to use it in accordance with its intended purpose,
including for error correction, unless otherwise specified in the
contract. This means that the person entitled to use the program can
copy it into his computer in order to run it.

A person having the right to use the software may make a backup copy
where such is necessary to ensure use of the software.

A person having the right to use the software shall be entitled, without
the permission of the author, to observe, study or test the functioning
of the software in order to determine the ideas and principles, which
underlie any element of the software if he does so while performing any
of the acts of loading, displaying, running, transmitting or storing the
software, which he is entitled to do.

Reproduction of the code of the software or translation of the form of
that code shall not require the permission of the author where
reproduction or translation within the meaning of article L. 122-6 is
indispensable for obtaining the information necessary to achieve the
interoperability of independently created software with other software.

However, it is expressly provided that these exceptions to the exclusive
rights shall neither prejudice the normal exploitation of the software
nor cause unreasonable prejudice to the author’s legitimate interests.

Any stipulation contrary to the provisions of article L. 122-6-1 shall
be null and void.

### Moral rights

The moral rights of the author generally include (i) the right to
disclose his work, (ii) the right of respect for his name and his work
and (iii) the right of withdrawal.

However, the Intellectual Property Code contains some specific rules
limiting the extent of the moral rights over software. It provides that,
except for any stipulation more favorable to him, the author may not (i)
oppose to modifications of the software, as far as such modifications do
not affect his honor or reputation, and/or (ii) exercise his right of
withdrawal.

In the absence of any specific provision regarding the right of
disclosure, opinion suggests that such right shall apply to software.

Moral rights are perpetual, inalienable and imprescriptible, which means
that an author cannot waive his moral rights on a literary or artistic
work or transfer them to a third person.

However, the moral rights may be subject to contractual waivers,
provided that such waivers are special and limited. For example, an
author can decide not to disclose his identity. The clauses imposing the
preservation of the author’s anonymity are valid, as long as the author
does not permanently waive his right of paternity. An anonymous author
may reveal his paternity at any time.

### Term of protection

According to article L. 123-1 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
the author shall enjoy, during his lifetime and for 70 years after his
death, the exclusive right to exploit his work in any form whatsoever
and to derive monetary profit therefrom.

In the case of collaborative works, the calendar year taken into account
for the calculation of the 70 years following death shall be that of the
death of the last surviving joint author.

In the case of collective works, the term of the exclusive right shall
be 70 years from January 1 of the calendar year following that in which
the work was published. This rule also applies to works produced
anonymously or under a pseudonym.

Finally, a composite work is protected regardless of the preexisting
work, even if the preexisting work has entered the public domain[^france_2].

### Copyright assignment

Article L. 131-1 of the French Intellectual Property Code provides that
the complete assignment of intellectual property rights in future works
shall be null and void.

According to the general regime for literary and artistic works,
assignment of the exclusive rights on software may be total or partial.
The assigned rights shall be “separately mentioned in the instrument of
assignment and the field of exploitation of the assigned rights being
defined as to its scope and purpose, as to place and as to
duration”[^france_3].

Contrary to the general regime, which imposes that the remuneration of
an author be proportional to the revenues derived from the sale or
exploitation of his work, article L. 131-4 of the French Intellectual
Property Code provides that the remuneration due to the author of
software in compensation for the assignment of his rights can be
calculated as a lump sum.

The assignment may always be done for free, considering the interest of
the author to release its work and have it brought to the knowledge of
the public.

### Special measures

Law n° 2006-961 of 1st August 2006, which implements Council Directive
2001/29/EC of 22nd May 2001 on the harmonization of certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society, provides some
specific rules regarding software.

Besides, general measures provided by the Intellectual Property Code to
enforce copyright, article L. 335-2-1 provides for penalties against any
person offering to the public a computer program aimed at providing
public access to protected works without authorization.

In addition, pursuant to article L. 331-5, right holders may implement
technological measures designed to prevent or restrict actions that they
have not authorized. This article also provides legal protection against
the circumvention of effective technological measures and against the
provision of devices, products or services to this effect. Nevertheless,
the article specifies that it is not applicable to the technological
measures used in connection with software.

## Unprotected software and public domain software

As previously discussed, only original software is protected by
copyright.

The original nature of software has been the subject of numerous debates
on principles and in courtrooms. The notion of originality, which is
traditionally defined as a reflection of an author’s personality, is
difficult to apply to a technical work like software.

Some authors agree that such reflection of an author’s personality
through software would mainly reside in “the choice to use one or
several possible methods, fulfilled in the final program”[^france_4].

In this respect, the full assembly of the Court of Cassation held that
software was original if it contained the “intellectual contribution of
the author and that originality extended to a personal effort over and
above the simple implementation of a restrictive and automatic software
and that the realization of said effort resulted in an individualized
structure”[^france_5].

Software that fails to meet this criterion is not liable to protection
under copyright law. This is the case for “applets”, for example, which
are used for web animation. Such software can be freely executed,
reproduced and modified without the author’s permission.

Software that comes into the public domain may also be freely used and
reproduced. Given the length of protection afforded under French
copyright law it can safely be considered that, at present, no software
has yet come into the public domain.

It can be questioned whether software can, at the author’s desire, be
created directly in the public domain. Contrary to free licenses, public
domain licenses are supposed to make the work in question as freely
accessible as if that work had come into the public domain. They suppose
that the author has renounced all rights over the software. This type of
license would appear to be possible as far as the author may freely
waive his patrimonial rights. The use of the software would, however, be
subject to the respect of the moral rights of the author.

## Analysis of FOSS under French law

Free software licenses have once been defined as “licenses through which
the author allows the copy, modification and distribution of the work
modified or not, concurrently, without transferring the author’s
copyright and without the user being able to limit the rights attached
to the original work and any derivatives thereof”[^france_6].

Hence, free software is not free of all rights. It is in fact protected
by copyright, but its source code may be freely executed and modified by
its user community. Depending on the type of license under which the
software was released (which may — or may not — include a copyleft), the
members of such user communities are — or are not — obligated to
disclose any modifications or improvements they made and communicate the
corresponding source codes to other users. For these reasons, many
authors favor the “Open Source Software” designation over that of “Free
Software”, as they find it more expressive and understandable.

The determination and the expression of rights between different
contributors will depend on the qualification given to the work.

### FOSS definitions

In accordance with the principle of free modification of software
distributed under a free license, a certain number of persons will
contribute to the evolution of the original software. The modified
software may then be defined as a collaborative work, a collective work
or a composite work.

The term “collective work” is applicable if the creation and the
disclosure of the software are carried out under the direction of the
initial author of the software. This definition allows the latter to
benefit from all rights attached to the software to the detriment of the
successive contributors.

The term “collaborative work” could also be used. However, in such case,
a concerted action on the part of all contributors is required — an
idea, which seems incompatible with the very nature of a free license.
Certain authors consider that this definition is the one that comes the
closest to the spirit of free work. Indeed, it has the advantage of
taking “the global evolving work and the equality of the authors”[^france_7]
into account. The use of this definition does, however, raise
difficulties, as it offers an indivisible right over the work to each of
the authors.

The final possibility is the definition as a derivative or composite
work. According to this definition, each original modification of the
software gives rise to a distinct version of the preceding work. It
allows the rights of each contributor to be clearly defined, provided
that each modification made to the original software can indeed be
individualized. This definition is the most commonly admitted in
principle[^france_8]. It is also the one that appears to have been accepted by
the Court of Paris, in a decision dated 28 March 2007[^france_9].

None of the definitions given by the Intellectual Property Code fully
accounts for the specific nature of free software, due in particular to
its evolutionary character resulting from the unusual granting of a
right to modify to all users. The remainder of the current paper is
based upon the most commonly admitted definition for open source
software, namely that of a derivative work.

### Copyright

The evolutionary character of free software makes the definition of each
author and contributor’s rights extremely complicated. Literary and
artistic ownership, which grants the author a monopoly over the
exploitation of the work, is effectively difficult to reconcile with the
freedoms of use and modification that govern free software in practice.

The definition of free software as a succession of derived works allows
the author of each modification to be clearly defined, together with the
scope of his rights. Each contributor adding original modifications to
the software thus creates an independent work from the modified work.
Consequently he enjoys all moral and patrimonial rights pertaining
thereto.

Under these circumstances it is important to distinguish the rights of
the initial author from those of the contributors.

The initial author is free to determine the fate of his patrimonial
rights. Contrary to moral rights, patrimonial rights may be assigned in
whole or in part, gifted, or licensed. Nothing prevents the author from
assigning or awarding operating permissions free of charge[^france_10]. This
gratuitous nature is in accordance with article L. 122-7 of the
Intellectual Property Code, which provides that “the right of
performance and the right of reproduction may be transferred, for or
without payment”. It is therefore up to the author to decide whether to
license free uses of his work.

Law n°2006-961 of August 2006 on the droits d’auteur and related rights
in the information society, introduced, among others, a new article L.
122-7-1 into the Intellectual Property Code in response to the
legislator’s wish that the development of the “free” movement be taken
into consideration. This article states that “the author is free to
provide his work to the public free of charge subject to the rights of
any future co-authors and third parties as well as in respect of any
conventions, which he may conclude”. The “free of charge” provision is
thus admitted in French law and has been acknowledged by courts[^france_11].

However, it would appear arguable, under copyright law, whether
so-called copyleft licenses compel contributors to give up their own
patrimonial rights over the work in order that others may freely copy,
modify or distribute the program. This assignment of a future right
disregards the fundamental right of the author to exploit his work.

Moreover, article L. 131-3 of the Intellectual Property Code imposes a
duty to mention each assignment separately in the instrument of
assignment and to define the field of exploitation of the assigned
rights as to its scope and purpose. Case law has thus consistently held
that general assignment clauses are invalid[^france_12]. The application of
this provision to software and licenses entails that a free license
granting the rights to copy, distribute and modify with no further
precision, such as the BSD license[^france_13], should be considered null and
void. In practice, the principle of strict interpretation of contracts
shall reduce the scope of such permissions to the methods of
exploitation defined in the contract.

However, case law has shown proof of flexibility in this field. Certain
decisions have been based on the real will of the parties[^france_14] or actual
use[^france_15] in order to validate an assignment and to appreciate its scope.

### Moral copyrights

The mechanisms of free licenses are based on the freedom for licensees
to use and to freely modify software. This freedom is liable to clash
with the moral rights of the author and those of the different
contributors.

#### Right to disclose

The author of the initial software exercises his right to disclose
through his decision to distribute the software under a free license. He
thus authorizes all modes of disclosure of the work, namely copying,
distribution and modification.

Licensees also enjoy a personal right to disclose over their own
contributions, where such contributions are of an original character.
The scope of such right depends on the conditions of the license under
which the software is disclosed.

Certain licenses require that the modified software be disclosed under
the same license. Such licenses are known as “Copyleft”.

With copyleft licenses the licensee may elect whether or not to disclose
his modifications, but cannot decide the conditions of such disclosure.
The author of the modified software’s disclosure rights are thus
considerably limited. However, this limitation of rights does not seem
to call the principles of copyright law into question considering that,
while the composite work is the property of its author, its exploitation
remains subject to the rights of the author of the preexisting work. The
author of the original software may therefore define the conditions
under which his work is disclosed without affecting the moral rights of
future contributors.

The disclosure rights granted to contributors by licenses without
copyleft are much more flexible. The contributors are free to use and
modify the software without being bound to subject their modified work
to the conditions of a given license.

#### Paternity rights

Paternity rights over the initial or modified software are not treated
uniformly by all free licenses.

Copyleft licenses are extremely detailed on paternity issues for
successive authors.

For example, the GPL license[^france_16], which is the best known and most
widely used free license, requires contributors to indicate their names
and to specify the modifications they made to the work to avoid any
mistaken attribution to a third party. As a result, anonymity rights,
which result from paternity rights, cannot be exercised when the
software is distributed under a license of this kind.

#### Right of integrity

Free licenses allow any person, who accepts the terms thereof to modify
the work.

According to software law, the author of the software cannot object to
modifications unless such modifications harm his honor or reputation.
Modifications made to correct or develop a program without the author’s
permission are thus valid.

However, prior authorization of any and all kinds of modifications to
the software by third parties is contrary to the right of integrity of
the work. Indeed, case law underlines the “inalienable right of respect
for work, a public order principle, which is opposed to the author
abandoning or assigning in a premature or general manner the exclusive
enjoyment of use, distribution, withdrawal, addition and changes, which
this latter may like to carry out”[^france_17]. Any software modification may
therefore expose its author to a future action based on the right to
respect for the original work.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses

#### Contractual organization

The originality of the distribution of free licenses lies in the fact
that the author does not simply disclose his work; he also organizes the
use which can be made thereof. He thus allows, through contract and
under certain conditions, the copying, transmission and modification of
the software he created. Any and all persons accepting such conditions
enter into a contractual relationship with the author.

The license agreement thus establishes a contractual relationship
between the licensees and the initial author. Each licensee who modifies
the work by virtue of the permission granted by the initial author
enjoys copyright protection for his original contributions. He may then
grant the same freedoms over his contributions. Users of the modified
work would then find themselves contractually bound, not only to the
initial author but also to the authors of subsequent modifications.

In theory users of the modified work must have permission to use and
modify the work, not only from the initial author but also from all
authors of subsequent modifications.

This being said, certain licenses, such as the GPL, specify that rights
over the modified work be granted only by the initial author to the
detriment of the rights of other contributors.

#### Validity of the agreement

The validity of such licenses can be called into question under basic
contract law, or under consumer laws.

From a contract law perspective, it should be noted that free software
is generally subject to standard licenses, which are real subscription
contracts (“take it or leave it”). Acceptance of the license is often by
tacit agreement, demonstrated by the carrying out of certain actions
allowed by the author. Indeed, it is consistently accepted by the courts
that the performance of an agreement may constitute acceptance of an
offer.[^france_18]

Turning to consumer laws, numerous standards are contrary to this type
of license. Consequently, should the licensee be a consumer or a
non-professional (as defined by French case law), a certain number of
clauses — such as those excluding all guarantees or those limiting or
excluding the developer’s liability[^france_19] — could automatically be
considered abusive.

Certain licenses could also find themselves in breach of the French law
imposing the use of the French language (generally referred to as the
“Toubon law”)[^france_20], which may lead to the payment of fines and/or the
unenforceability of such licenses.

Likewise, certain licenses do not comply with the rules regulating
online agreements (e.g. prior information of the licensee; “double
click” requirement to express acceptance…empty)[^france_21], which may lead to
the unenforceability of such licenses.

In spite of these notions of French law, the Court of Appeal of Paris
indirectly acknowledged the validity of such free licenses in a decision
dated 16th September 2009[^france_22].

#### Breach of license conditions

Failure to comply with the provisions of a license constitutes a breach
by the licensee of his contractual obligations as well as a breach of
the copyright rules.

With copyleft licenses, the free use of software is subject to the
condition that the user releasing a modified version of the software
allows free access to the modified source code and its further
modification to third parties. According to Professor Gautier, this is a
sort of condition subsequent to the legal act, which is generally stated
in the license terms[^france_23]. If the contributor fails to comply with the
terms of the license, the license is automatically revoked by his fault,
without prejudice to any future claims on grounds of piracy by the
original author.

On that basis, the Court of Appeal of Paris in a decision dated 16th
September 2009, pronounced the revocation of a contract for a violation
of the license conditions: a free software was used by a licensee as a
basis for the development of an application, but the licensee removed
the original copyright notice referring to the authors of the two files
and replaced them with his own, removed the contents of the license
under which the original software was released and failed to provide the
source code of his modified version of the free software. The Court of
Appeal therefore held that several conditions of the GNU GPL had not
been complied with.

### Waiver and liability

The majority of free licenses includes a limitation or exemption of
liability. This is the case with GNU and Mozilla licenses, for example.
The question arises as to the validity of such licenses under French
law.

Article 1150 of the French Civil Code allows for the limitation of
contractual liability. Such limitations are valid in the absence of
gross negligence or fraud, in as far as they are agreed between
professionals.

Looking at consumer law, clauses “excluding or limiting the
non-professional or consumer’s legal rights in the event of a failure by
the professional to comply with any of his obligations” are
unquestionably deemed abusive and consequently held to be null and void,
potentially leading the distributor and/or the editor to be considered
fully liable for all direct damages[^france_24]. In order to determine the
validity of such clauses, it is therefore necessary to determine the
status of who modifies the software source code: professional or
consumer.

Finally, there is the question of liability for defective products in
the realm of free software[^france_25], whereby the producer is automatically
responsible for any material damage or personal injury caused by a
defect in his product. Opinion is divided on this point, as to whether
such liability can be applied to software. Some authors consider that
the law only applies to material products and that article 1386-3 of the
French Civil Code was not intended to include products of intellectual
origin[^france_26]. It is not impossible that case law will extend the scope of
the law to include intangibles.

Where it is admitted that software falls within the scope of liability
for defective products, this will only concern professional suppliers.
The independent developer, whose profession is not to supply software,
is therefore not concerned. The professional developer could take refuge
behind the principle of “development risk”, which would allow for an
exclusion of liability, as far as the professional may prove that the
state of scientific and technical knowledge did not allow the existence
of the defect to be known at the time that the product came into
circulation. It is within this meaning that the warranty clause in the
CeCILL license has been produced[^france_27].

## FOSS Cases in France

Although it can be said that the free domain relatively generates few
cases of litigation, users of free software are nevertheless subject to
rules governing use and distribution. Developers and other organizations
involved with free software no longer hesitate before pursuing users,
who fail to comply with the conditions of applicable licenses,
particularly in matters of distribution.

Three cases have come before the French courts.

1.  The first case before the High Court of Paris in November 2008
    concerned a claim brought against the access provider Free, by three
    free software developers. The latter accused Free of distributing
    the Freebox (the modem provided by the ISP to its customers),
    containing free software components, in breach of the terms of the
    associated GPL license. The courts have not yet published a decision
    on this case.

2.  The second concerns the CNRS, in a case brought by Educaffix[^france_28].
    The latter company had concluded software transfer agreements with
    several higher education establishments and the CNRS. The
    transferred software could, however, only work with a free piece of
    software, JATLite, developed by the University of Stanford under GNU
    GPL license. Educaffix requested that the contract be declared null
    and void for fraud on the basis that CNRS had concealed the fact
    that the existence of the free software included in the transfer
    agreement required permission from a third party holder of the
    rights over said free software, in this case the University
    of Stanford. Further, Educaffix requested that the contract be
    revoked for the sole fault of CNRS because the exploitation of the
    transferred software implied by necessity the commission of an act
    of piracy over the free software.

    The Court held that “this program has the particular feature of
    depending on a GNU license, which allows free use of the software,
    but requires a license if the work based on the program can not
    reasonably be identified as independent and must therefore be
    considered as a derivative of the JATLite program.”

    This decision constitutes an application of the provisions of the
    GNU license and refers to, without directly citing, article 2 of the
    GNU license according to which “these requirements apply to the
    modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are
    not derived from the Program and can reasonably be considered
    independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and
    its terms, shall not apply to those sections when one distributes
    them as separate works. Although, should one distribute the same
    sections as part of a whole based on the Program, the distribution
    of the whole must be placed under the terms of this License, whose
    permissions to other licensees extend to the whole, and thus to each
    and any of its parts, regardless of who wrote them”. Through this
    decision, the judges recognized the contaminant nature of GNU GPL on
    a derived program.

    It should be noted, however, that the decision does not recognize
    the validity of the GNU-GPL license, as far as it would have been up
    to the holder of the rights (University of Stanford, or transferee)
    to act on the legal principle of piracy and to request the
    recognition of its rights, which was not the case here.

3.  The validity of the GNU GPL license was finally recognized in a
    decision issued by the Court of Appeal of Paris dated 16
    September 2009.

    In this case the National Association for Adult Education (AFPA)
    issued a call for tenders for the implementation of learning spaces,
    which was finally granted to EDU 4. Doubting the sincerity of the
    offer submitted by EDU 4, AFPA declared the contract terminated. EDU
    4 felt that the product they delivered matched the expectations and
    sued AFPA for abusive breach of contract, which claim was upheld by
    the High Court of Bobigny in 2004.

    Before the Court of Appeal, AFPA claimed that EDU4 had not clearly
    informed them that a free piece of software had been incorporated
    into the provided solution, that the copyright mentions relating to
    this piece of software had been modified and that the text of the
    GNU-GPL license had been removed. The Court of Appeal of Paris
    upheld the claims made by AFPA and held that EDU4 had failed to
    comply with the terms of the GNU license.

    This decision is important because it was feared that France, one of
    the countries with the highest levels of copyright protection, would
    deem the free license to be null and void. It also reminds
    developers, who have decided to integrate free software that this
    decision is not without consequences and that a free software is not
    a software free of rights.

## Legal procedures

Free software developers enjoy several methods of ensuring the
compliance with their rights. They can act on the basis of contract law
or copyright law.

On the basis of contract law, where one of the parties to a license
agreement fails to perform his obligations, the other party may sue to
demand the execution of the promised obligations[^france_29] or the termination
of the agreement[^france_30]. That party may also claim damages where the
execution becomes impossible or where the failure by the licensee to
carry out his obligations has resulted in repairable damages.

On the basis of copyright law, failure by the licensee to comply with
the terms of the license is tantamount to piracy. Effectively, article
L. 335-3 of the Intellectual Property Code states that “the crime of
piracy is the violation of one of the rights of the author of a piece of
software, as defined at article L. 122-6”. Any and all reproduction,
representation, distribution, modification, or marketing of software
without the consent of its author is a civil tort and a criminal
offense. As a result, the licensee can take action in civil and criminal
courts to ensure the compliance with his rights. Before criminal courts,
the pirate risks up to 3 years in prison and fines of up to 300,000
Euros[^france_31].

### Recommended literature

#### Opinion

-   S. Basset and Ch. Bigot, Les logiciels open source : quel statut
    juridique ?, Cahier Lamy droit de l’informatique et des réseaux,
    April 2003, n° 157, p. 26

-   Ch. Caron, Les licences de logiciels dits “libres” à l'épreuve du
    droit français, D. 2003, p. 1556

-   M. Clément-Fontaine, Les oeuvres libres, Thèse, Montpellier, 2006

-   M. Clément Fontaine, Licence Publique Générale GNU (GNU GPL),
    Mémoire DEA, Montpellier, 1999

-   Y. Dietrich, Logiciels Opensource : une réalité juridique au sein
    des entreprises, RLDI, April 2005, n° 4, p. 28

-   P. Gaudillère, Licences de logiciels libres et risques
    juridiques, Comm. Com. Electr. 2005, étude 16

-   Ph. Gilliéron, Open Source et droit des brevets, RLDI, February
    2007, n° 24, p. 67

-   B. Jean and A. Zapolsky, La propriété intellectuelle dans
    l’industrie de l’open source (1ère partie), Gaz. Pal., 24-25 October
    2008, p. 19

-   B. Jean and A. Zapolsky, La propriété intellectuelle dans
    l’industrie de l’open source (2ème partie), Gaz. Pal., 23-24 January
    2009, p. 15

-   C Rojinsky and V. Grynbaum, Les licences libres et le droit
    français, Propr. Intell. 2004, n° 4, p. 28

-   B. de Roquefeuil and M. Bougeaois, Logiciel libre et licence CeCILL,
    une transposition fidèle des principes de la licence GNU GPL dans un
    contrat de droit français, Gaz. Pal. 2005, chron. P. 915

-   L. Schurr, La licence GNU/GPL (V3) a presque deux ans : un bilan
    mitigé, Gaz. Pal., 22 and 23 April 2009, p. 9

#### Case law

-   TGI Paris, 28 March 2007, Educaffix c/ CNRS, Gaz. Pal., n° 22, 22
    January 2008, p. 35

-   CA Paris, 16 September 2009, RG n° 01/24298, SA EDU 4 c/ Association
    AFPA
    
[^france_bio1]: *Fabrice Perbost is a partner in the Paris office of Kahn & Associés. Fabrice advises
companies in the field of intellectual property and technologies,
particularly as regards private and public contracts. In the course of
his activity, Fabrice has developed a specific expertise in the Open
Source model. Fabrice is a member of several IP/IT working groups such
as ITechLaw (International Technology Law Association) and also a
lecturer at two Paris universities. 
<http://www.kahnlaw.com/en>*

[^france_bio2]: *Alan Walter specialises in intellectual property and technologies. He provides legal
assistance in both advice and litigation in several fields like software
industry (in particular Open Source matters), Internet & innovative
technologies regulation, IP, and privacy and data protection. 
<alan.walter@runbox.com>*

[^france_1]: Cass. Ass.plén., March 1986,: JCP G 1986, II, 20631; Cass. Civ.
    1ère, 16 April 1991,: JCP G 1991, II, 21770.

[^france_2]: Cass. Crim., 27 February 1845: DP 1845, 1, p. 130.

[^france_3]: Article L. 131-3 of the French Intellectual Property Code.

[^france_4]: P-Y Gautier, *Propriété littéraire et artistique*, PUF, 6th
    edition 2007, n° 532.

[^france_5]: Cass. Ass.plén., 7 March 1986, op. cit.

[^france_6]: M. Clément-Fontaine, *Les oeuvres libres*, Thèse Montpellier,
    2006.

[^france_7]: M. Clément-Fontaine, *Les oeuvres libres*, op. cit.

[^france_8]: See in particular: Ch. Caron, *Les licences de logiciels dits
    “libres” à l'épreuve du droit d’auteur français*, Dalloz 2003 p.
    1556; M. Vivant, C. le Stanc, L. Rapp., M. Guibal et J-L. Bilon,
    *Lamy Droit de l’informatique et des réseaux*, Lamy 2010, n° 2942.

[^france_9]: TGI Paris, 28 March 2007, Educaffix c/ CNRS, Gaz. Pal., n° 22, 22
    January 2008, p. 35.

[^france_10]: M. Vivant, *La pratique de la gratuité en droit d’auteur*, RLDI
    mai 2010, n° 60 p. 59.

[^france_11]: See in particular: CA Versailles, 20 January 1987, D. 1988, somm.
    207; Cass. Civ. 1ère, 23 January 2001, Comm. Com. Electr. 2000,
    comm. n° 23.

[^france_12]: Cass. 1ère. Civ., 15 February 2005: Légipresse 2005, n° 211, I,
    p. 65.

[^france_13]: BSD licenses (*Berkeley software distribution license* allow all
    or part of a software subject to such a license to be used without
    restriction (in particular to be integrated into a free or owned
    software). In 1999, the BSD License was modified to remove a
    publicity clause requiring a copyright mention in all advertising or
    documentation supplied with the software.

[^france_14]: Cass. Civ. 1ère, 27 May 1986, Bull. Civ. 1986, I, n° 142.

[^france_15]: Cass. Civ 1ère, 15 May 2002, JurisData n° 2002-014336.

[^france_16]: Otherwise known as “GNU General Public License” or “Licence
    générale publique GNU”.

[^france_17]: Cass. 1ère civ., 28 January 2003, Bull. civ. I, n° 28.

[^france_18]: Cass. Com., 25 June 1991, Bull. Civ. IV, n° 234.

[^france_19]: Articles L. 132-1 and seq., and R. 132-1 and seq. of the Consumer
    Code.

[^france_20]: Law n °94-665 of 4 August 1994 concerning use of the French
    language.

[^france_21]: L. 121-16 and seq. of the Consumer Code.

[^france_22]: CA Paris, 16 September 2009, RG n° 01/24298, SA EDU 4 c/
    Association AFPA.

[^france_23]: P-Y. Gautier, *Propriété littéraire et artistique*, op. cit.

[^france_24]: Article R. 132-1, 6° of the Consumer Code.

[^france_25]: Articles 1386-1 and following of the Civil Code resulting from
    Law n° 98-389 of 19 May 1998 applying Community Directive n° 85-374
    of 25 July 1985 concerning the unification of legislative,
    regulatory and administrative provisions in Member States on
    liability for defective products.

[^france_26]: P. Oudot, *Le risque de développement. Contribution au maintien
    du droit à réparation*, thèse Dijon, 2005; Ph. Le Tourneau, *Droit
    de la responsabilité et des contrats*, Dalloz Action, 2009-2010.

[^france_27]: Article 9.1: “The Licensee acknowledges that the scientific and
    technical state-of-the-art when the Software was distributed did not
    enable all possible uses to be tested and verified, nor for the
    presence of possible defects to be detected. In this respect, the
    Licensee’s attention has been drawn to the risks associated with
    loading, using, modifying and/or developing and reproducing the
    Software which are reserved for experienced users”.

[^france_28]: TGI Paris, 28 March 2007, op. cit.

[^france_29]: Article 1142 of the Civil Code.

[^france_30]: Article 1184 of the Civil Code.

[^france_31]: Article 335-3 of the Intellectual Property Code.

