# Taiwan

*Lucien Cheng-Hsia Lin[^taiwan_bio]*

## Introduction to software protection under Taiwan law

### Body of law

Copyright protection of software in Taiwan is regulated under the
general Copyright Act of 10 Feb. 2010. Instead of drafting specialized
regulations for computer programs, the legislature in Taiwan made all
related norms and standards merge into the established provisions in
Copyright Act[^taiwan_1].

The civil and commercial legislative system in Taiwan is designed as one
integrated infrastructure. This means when it comes to copyright
protection and infringement issues, treatments and procedures should be
taken under the principles of the Civil Code[^taiwan_2]. However, some articles
of Copyright Act are also deemed as special provisions to the general
Criminal Code, that is to say, when a criminal prosecution of unlawful
copyright infringement has been impleaded by prosecutor, Criminal Code
as well as the Copyright Act should be put into reference. Moreover,
when the computer programs are involved in the commercial use, the
Consumer Protection Law[^taiwan_3] is the principal supplementary regulations
to general laws. Besides, when a copyright issue occurs in Taiwan, there
is also an optional dispute mediation procedure could be chosen in the
adjective law area, the details of this mediation mechanism are defined
in the Regulations of Copyright Dispute Mediation[^taiwan_4], in brief,
considering that the formal lawsuit abiding by the Intellectual Property
Case Adjudication Act[^taiwan_5], Taiwan Code of Civil Procedure[^taiwan_6], and The
Code of Criminal Procedure[^taiwan_7] might take litigants too much time and
expense, both parties in a copyright dispute event could choose this
mediation procedure in consensus as an alternative solution. After a
settlement of the mediation has been reached and ratified[^taiwan_8] by the
Intellectual Property Court, the written mediation settlement statement
shall have the same force as a final and unappeasable court judgment and
constitute a writ of execution by itself as well.

### Copyright Act: Object of protection

Computer programs are protected by copyrights as one special work in the
intellectual domain similar to literary and artistic creation, this is
declared in article 5, paragraph 1, subparagraph 10 of the Copyright Act
as *“Works means a creation within an intellectual domain and shall
include Computer programs.”*  However, there aren’t many details being
told in the Copyright Act about scales of creativities for copyright
qualified computer programs. The only specific clause can be referred is
article 3, *“Work protected by Copyright Act means a creation that is
within a literary, scientific, artistic, or other intellectual
domain.”*  Deduced from article 3, legal doctrine established that the
originality is still needed to be seen for a computer program pursuing
copyright protection, because the originality is the very essence of
creation in intellectual domain. However, how intensive the originality
should be and by which method it could be measured is yet to be
extensive interpreted. By now, analyzed on most rulings by the courts
and most comments from the jurists, there is only one clear line has
been drawn on this topic, that is sweat of the brow doctrine should not
be applied directly without proper elaboration in copyright area[^taiwan_9],
which means, pure labour service output without originalities should not
be deemed as intellectual creation, although the threshold of
originality for copyright protection is fairly low by the courts, it is
still obliged to be found nevertheless.

Moreover, as it says in article 10-1 of the Copyright Act: *“Protection
for copyrights that has been obtained in accordance with this Act shall
only extend to the expression of the work in question, and shall not
extend to the work’s underlying ideas, procedures, production processes,
systems, methods of operation, concepts, principles, or discoveries.”* 
This principle applies to computer programs like other copyright works.
Generally speaking, two fundamental points should be sustained on
computer programs for copyright protection, which are: (i) Producing
process of the computer program doesn’t only consist of merely
registering or copying the reality or executing a functional routine.
(ii) The originality involved in the computer program is required to
make it qualified as an own intellectual creation of the author, no
matter how minor the originality is.

### Authors/Beneficiaries

Article 11 and 12 of the Copyright Act provide that the author of a
computer program should be the one who actually does the design and
writing of the program, whether the author is completing the work as an
employee within the scope of a persistent employment or as a contractor
under a task-based commission. In most cases the author refers to the
software engineer of a computer program, if it does have freedom of
development when creating the work. As for the economic rights to the
work, they belong to the employer in an employment relation, and to the
contractor in a task-based commission. However, either in the employment
relation or in the commission cooperation, all the assignments of
authorship attribution and economic right allocation could be
prearranged by a contractual agreement between both parties. Namely, in
order to find out and make confirmation about which party is the one
that authorship should be attributed to or economic rights should be
adhered to, details of the contract of employment or commission need to
be fully revealed to that purpose. Additionally, according to article
12, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act: *“Where the economic rights are
enjoyed by the commissioned person pursuant to the provisions of the
preceding paragraph, the commissioning party may exploit the work.”* 
That is to say, if there isn’t any prearrangement in contract for
authorship and economic rights between the opposite commissioning
parties, then authorship and economic rights of the computer program
would be appointed to the contractor as a default arrangement. However,
the commissioning party does pay remuneration to the contractor for the
work to compensate its offering, this clause makes a supplementary
explanation for its lawful exploitation status on the work, whether this
privilege is recorded in writing or not, it applies to the commissioning
party as well at law.

### Exclusive rights

The exclusive economic rights defined by the Copyright Act are listed
from article 22 to 29, the whole package included (a) reproduce the
work, (b) publicly recite the work, (c) publicly broadcast the work, (d)
publicly present the work, (e) publicly perform the work, (f) transmit
the work to the public, (g) publicly display the work, (h) adapt the
work into derivative ones or (i) compile the work into compilation ones,
(j) distribute the works through transfer of ownership, and (k) rent the
work. Although all these rights are not fit in computer programs in
theory and in essence, on account of computer programs are treated equal
to other copyright works under the Copyright Act without specific
differences, all the exclusive rights listed above could be covered in
the software area, as long as it is applied in a realizable way.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights

Besides making a legal plea and excuse by asserting the fair use
doctrine based on article 44 to 66 as limitations to exclusive rights,
there is only one general exception applied in the Taiwan Copyright Act,
which is the first sale doctrine under the jurisdiction of Taiwan. It is
expressly provided by article 59-1 of the Copyright Act: *“A person who
has obtained ownership of the original of a work or a lawful copy
thereof within the territory under the jurisdiction of the Republic of
China may distribute it by means of transfer of ownership.”*  All the
copyright works apply to this provision, as well as computer programs.
Hence, when a computer program was attached to a storage medium, or
physical product, machine, and similar equipment, then be lawfully
transferred to others with rightholder’s consent, this transaction shall
exhaust the distribution right of that copy of computer program under
the jurisdiction of Taiwan, with the exception of the right to control
further rental of the program if it is incorporated to a physical
product, machine, and equipment rather than a simple storage medium,
according to article 60, paragraph 2 in the same Act.

Other exceptions specific for computer programs are set forth in article
59 of the Copyright Act, *“(i) The owner of a legal copy of a computer
program may alter the program where necessary for utilization on a
machine used by such owner, or may reproduce the program as necessary
for backup; provided, this is limited to the owner’s personal use. (ii)
If the owner referred to in the preceding paragraph loses ownership of
the original copy for any reason other than the destruction or loss of
the copy, all altered and backup copies shall be destroyed unless the
economic rights holder grants its consent otherwise.”*  article 59 cited
above is deemed as compulsory law. Therefore, contractual agreements in
conflict with that are held to be nonexistence.

### Moral rights

Moral rights are highly valued by the Copyright Act in Taiwan and
applied to computer programs if realizable in essence like other
copyright works as well. As expressed in article 21 and 18 of the
Copyright Act, moral rights belong exclusively to the author and shall
not be transferred or succeeded. Moreover, the protection of moral
rights of an author who has died or been extinguished shall be treated
the same as the author was alive or in existence and shall not be
infringed upon by any person.

In other words, moral rights are deemed as the “specific exclusive
rights without transferability” in Taiwan. That is to say, when the
authorship attribution of a copyright work has been made, moral rights
adhered to that authorship shall not be changed or transferred to other
person or legal entity by any means, and it remains in force after the
transfer of the proprietary rights and following the death of the author
for evermore.

According to article 16 of the Civil Code, moral rights are generally
considered to be an essential legal capacity, and declared to be not
permitted to waive in Taiwan. Although they are treated as inalienable
rights, this does not mean that it is impossible for rightholder to
renounce under certain circumstances. From the standpoints explained in
official documents issued by the Ministry of the Interior in
Taiwan[^taiwan_10], global renouncement of the future exercise of moral rights
should be void. However, if the renouncement of the scope could be
stipulated with well-defined boundaries, such as subject, duration, and
applied area being prearranged for the renouncement, the renouncement of
moral rights could be validly sustained. In other words, the “Principle
of Freedom of Contract” shall be honored.

Moral rights protected by the Copyright Act in Taiwan consist of three
parts:

Right of publicly release  
*The author of a work shall enjoy the right to publicly release the
work* provided by article 15 of the Copyright Act;

Right of paternity  
*The author of a work shall have the right to indicate its name, a
pseudonym, or no name on the original or copies of the work, or when the
work is publicly released. The author has the same right to a derivative
work based on its work* provided by article 16 of the Copyright Act;'

Right of integrity  
*The author has the right to prohibit others from distorting,
mutilating, modifying, or otherwise changing the content, form, or name
of the work, thereby damaging the author’s reputation* provided by
article 17 of the Copyright Act.

### Term of protection

For economic rights of computer programs, the same terms to works of
literature, science, and art apply: 50 years as of December 31 following
the death of the author, and if the economic rights in work are
appointed to a legal entity, the 50 years duration should be counting
from the day that work is publicly released. In case of co-authors,
economic rights in a joint work subsist for 50 years after the death of
the last surviving author. More details about the duration of economic
rights could be provided in article 30, 31, 33, and 35 of the Copyright
Act. However, there is no limited term of protection for moral rights of
copyright works including computer programs. This is clearly declared in
article 18 of the Copyright Act. However, in the latter part of the same
article also emphasizes that *“After the death of the author, an act
shall not constitute an infringement where it can be considered that the
author’s intent has not been contravened given the nature and degree of
the act of exploitation, social changes, or other circumstances.”* 
Hence, moral rights of copyrights shall not perish after the death of
the author, but it would, to some extent, be applied in a more moderated
and compromised way.

### Copyright assignment

As mentioned previously about the default setting by article 11 and 12
of the Copyright Act, the authorship of a computer program is attributed
to whom actually does the design and writing of it, and the economic
rights are allocated to the employer in a persistent employment relation
and to the contractor in a task-based commission. Nevertheless, all the
assignments above could be transposed on a preconcerted contractual
agreement. When the authorship and economic rights have been attributed
and allocated at law or by a contractual agreement, moral rights are
adhered to the authorship and can not be succeeded or transferred
thereafter. However, there are no such restrictions imposed on economic
rights, according to article 36 of the Copyright Act *“Economic rights
may be transferred in whole or in part to another person and may be
jointly owned with other persons.”* 

Generally speaking, economic rights of copyrights assignment procedure
in Taiwan were made in a very flexible and customized way. Some people
might even regard it as under a loose legal control. Because there are
actually no any legal formalities required for an economic right
assignment in Taiwan, none of them are asked by the Copyright Act and
Civil Code. Although, according to article 116 of the Civil Code and
article 4 of the Electronic Signatures Act, both parties in a economic
right assignment agreement can still stipulate certain formalities by
themselves, even the formalities are provided in an electronic record
way could be served properly. However, if the parties did not arrange
any definite form for the economic right assignment, the agreement will
still be valid, even if it is agreed between the parties as a consensual
contract. Even so, article 36, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act
expresses that *“The scope of the transfer of the economic rights shall
be as stipulated by the parties; rights not clearly covered by such
stipulations shall be presumed to have not been transferred.”*  In terms
of that, although the economic right assignment could be made valid on
the condition of a consensual contract, people still tend to make the
agreement on a written document or through a similar method like that to
preserve the related information as many as possible in order to clearly
record the details of the stipulations.

### Special measures

Some articles of Copyright Act are deemed as special provisions to the
general Criminal Code, those provisions applied to computer programs
like other copyright works. In that case, when a legal complaint about
copyright infringements has been submitted by the rightholder to the
authority, and has been evaluated as an intentional offence by
prosecutor, the prosecutor who undertakes this issue can therefore
initiate the prosecution based on article 91 to 100 of the Copyright Act
to place the proper criminal responsibilities on the infringer involved.
The criminal punishment for copyright infringements varies with
different accusations being charged. For a overall but not precise
description, the most serious punishment could be imposed would be
imprisonment for no more than 5 years, detention, or in lieu thereof or
in addition thereto a fine not more than 5 million New Taiwan Dollars.
However, if the benefit obtained by the infringer exceeds the maximum
fine, article 96-2 of the Copyright Act hereon could be applied by court
to increase the fine limitation to the whole obtained benefit. Besides
that, according to article 103 of the Copyright Act: Upon complaint or
information of an infringement of a person’s copyrights, judicial police
officials or judicial police may seize the infringing works to cease the
ongoing unlawful infringements.

Except for the substantive law, when it comes to disputes concerning
copyrights or plate rights, there is also one special measure could be
taken in the adjective law area, which is the optional conciliation
process regulated by the Regulations of Copyright Dispute Mediation in
Taiwan. Both parties in a copyright dispute could choose this mediation
procedure in consensus as an alternative solution to the normal
litigation procedure. After a settlement of the mediation has been
reached and ratified as not contrary to act, regulation, public order,
good morals, and compulsory executabilities by the Intellectual Property
Court, the written mediation settlement statement shall have the same
force as a final and unappealable court judgment and constitute a writ
of execution by itself as well.

## Unprotected software and public domain software

As set forth above, two fundamental criteria should be met on computer
programs for the copyright protection, which are: (i) Producing process
of the computer program doesn’t only consist of merely registering or
copying the reality or executing a functional routine. (ii) The
originality involved in the computer program is required to make it
qualified as an own intellectual creation of the author, no matter how
minor the originality is. As a matter of fact, the threshold of
originality for copyright protection is fairly low, therefore most of
the computer programs shall be protected by copyrights, no matter
whether it is made in a proprietary software mode or under a Free and
Open Source Software (hereinafter abbreviated as the “FOSS”) license.

Opposite to the computer programs with copyright protection, there are
also softwares which are not protected under certain circumstances
described in article 42 and 43 of the Copyright Act. Briefly speaking,
economic rights of computer programs are extinguished upon expiration of
the term of protection, this kind of extinguishment applies to the
situation that economic rights holder has died or been extinguished
without any inheritors other than the nation or a local government.
After the extinguishment, any person may freely exploit the computer
programs without any legal restrictions. In fact, the common used word
“Public Domain” or its synonyms are not declared in the Taiwan Copyright
Act, however, most legal critics agree that the sentence used in article
43 as *“Any person may freely exploit a work for which the economic
rights have been extinguished”*  is a very much equivalent expression to
the same thing.

Even so, there is still one thing needed further discussion and
confirmation: whether the economic rights of copyrights can be abandoned
by their rightholders in advance to make the work into the area of
Public Domain earlier. This question has not been fully answered by the
Copyright Act directly. However, in legal theory, the property rights
are always not be categorized as the “specifically exclusive rights
without transferability” defined in article 16 of Civil Code. Moreover,
according to article 40, paragraph 2 of the Copyright Act, an author of
a joint work is expressly allowed at law to abandon its share of the
ownership to other co-authors of the work. Therefore, if we apply this
clause mutatis mutandis to article 42 of the Copyright Act, the
deduction we shall find is that when all the authors have abandoned
their economic rights in a joint work, the work shall hence be allocated
into the Public Domain. Based on this very standpoint, an author who
makes a work by its own can theoretically abandon the economic rights of
that in the same way. Namely, economic rights of computer programs shall
be allowed to be abandoned by the rightholders before expiration of the
term of protection. In other words, the abandoning statements made by
the rightholders will render computer programs as unprotected softwares,
and therefore into the Public Domain area.

## Analysis of FOSS under Taiwan law

Provided by article 10 of the Copyright Act, author of a work shall
enjoy copyrights upon completion of the work. That means when a creation
is completed, the author doesn’t have to apply for extra registration or
to go through any process, because with the essential originality the
work will be subjected to copyright protection automatically. This is
so-called “self-executing protection principle on copyrights”. From this
standpoint, computer programs with certain originalities should be
protected by copyrights automatically, whether they are accomplished by
a single author or by multiple authors cooperating under the FOSS
licensing architecture.

When it comes to FOSS license analysis in the common law system,
discussion upon differences between “bare license” to “bilateral
contract” usually occurs. This analysis template might be one thing of
importance in the applicable common law system. However, it doesn’t seem
to bring out much practical influence on the legal system in Taiwan. As
a matter of fact, there are still some legal theory discussions about
the differences between unilateral act, bilateral act, unilateral
contract, and bilateral contract for the juridical acts, but most of
those discussions remain as academic subjects. Judging from the fact
that in Taiwan “bare license” is lacking of corresponding mechanisms
either in substantive law or in adjective law, and in reality most
courts always treat the computer program utilization agreement as a
copyright contract, hereunder when it comes to analysis of FOSS, the
FOSS licenses themselves will be treated as contracts and the licensing
modes based on that will be reviewed from the fundamental copyright
regulations to supplementary contract stipulations. In a nutshell, the
FOSS licenses deviate a lot from conventional license agreements that
under the law in Taiwan, they should be considered as the sui generis
license agreements based on the same fundamental copyright mechanisms
but adjusted to some extent by contractual agreements for matching a new
collaborative development methodology.

### Copyrights

One very essential problem to the FOSS project is that it is made with
accumulated multiple authors with or without coordination. On account of
that, to well apply the current copyright regulations onto it could be a
very challenging task because the cooperation methodologies operated in
FOSS project might not be foreseeing and taking into consideration when
the copyright regulations was enacted by the legislators. Generally
speaking, a FOSS project could be deemed as a joint work in article 8 of
Copyright Act in Taiwan or a derivative work in article 6 depending on
which one fits the real situation most for the FOSS project. However,
neither the joint work type nor the derivative work type could one
hundred percent match the reality of a FOSS project.

Take the joint work for example, the feature for cooperation between
multiple authors is equally found in a conventional joint computer
program and FOSS project. However, most people think it is necessary
that a joint work should be made by co-authors in consultation. In other
words, there must be certain interactions and communications among the
co-authors for the composition of a joint creation. Judging from that,
quite a number of FOSS projects actually do not have anything to do with
this prerequisite. In fact, many participants of a FOSS project might
just take part in the code committing merely under the same coding style
and licensing rules without knowing each other. This is so-called
“Cooperation without Coordination”[^taiwan_11] mechanism of the FOSS projects.
From this point of view, the type of joint work defined by the current
Copyright Act can’t not cover all the well-known features of a FOSS
project.

If we take the derivative work into consideration, the feature for
continuing modifications to the original work is identically proved in a
conventional derivative computer program and a FOSS project. However,
most people think it is fundamentally required that a derivative work
should be made with certain originalities to some extent, that is, there
must be quite a bit creativities comparing to the original work for a
ratification. Rethinking on this, quite a number of FOSS projects
actually do not make modifications by that standard. As a matter of
fact, many contributions committed to a FOSS project might just be taken
as a bug fix or merely a patch being made of scripts without copyright
protection on it. However, accumulated by all these little by little and
piece by piece, many small contributions might eventually make a
copyrights-meaningful derivative improvement. From this point of view,
the type of derivative work defined by the current Copyright Act can’t
not explain all the details well about when is the proper counting point
that a derivative work to an original FOSS project has been made.

Roughly speaking, take the FOSS project into application, depending on
its development process and phase, as a joint work or a derivative work
under the Copyright Act in Taiwan could be doable without conflicts with
legal regulations in essence. In fact, some FOSS projects are
collaboratively or derivatively accomplished exactly in this way. Yet,
either the copyright type of the joint work or the derivative work can
not sufficiently express the features of a FOSS project in operation. Be
on a eclectically thinking about this, for a FOSS project copyright
application in Taiwan, it can be deemed as a joint work or a derivative
work of the Copyright Act in the first place based on its development
situation. Secondly, it shall follow up in accordance with its
supplementary stipulations under the respective FOSS licenses. This
might be a much more rational and workable way for an overall copyright
protection on FOSS projects for the time being.

### Qualification of FOSS

As mentioned above, with the essential originality the computer programs
will be subjected to copyright protection automatically, this is clearly
stated in the article 5, paragraph 1, subparagraph 10 and article 10 of
the Copyright Act in Taiwan. Referring to current copyright types of the
Copyright Act, an indivisible computer program made by multiple
participants concurringly in the same period of time could be
categorized as a joint work, and a modified computer program qualified
for originalities made by multiple participants separately in different
period of time could be categorized as a derivative work. However, most
people think it is necessary that a joint work should be made by
co-authors in consultation, and a derivative work should be made with
certain originalities to some extent. With regard to these two criteria,
some FOSS projects might not be able to pass the evaluation in full.

In that case, according to article 1 of the Civil Code[^taiwan_12], one can
always apply the related provisions mutatis mutandis for a better
resolution in the civil law area. That is to say, if a FOSS project
fulfills the whole legal requirements as to the joint work or to the
derivative work of the Copyright Act, then it shall be protected as its
respectively proper copyright type. However, there might be some
features of the FOSS project can not well expressed and put into
practice only by the statutory provisions. This is where the contractual
stipulations should be stepping in. Because only with the complementary
circulation between the Copyright Act and specific FOSS licensing
agreement should the FOSS licensing mode be able to operate smoothly as
it sets to be.

#### Rights of the original co-authors

Provided in article 8 of the Copyright Act *“A joint work is a work that
has been completed by two or more persons where the creation of each
person cannot be separately exploited.”*  According to that, a computer
program can be estimated as a joint work when it is made by multiple
authors with certain interactions and communications for the cooperation
among them, and can therefore apply all the related provisions about the
joint work of the Copyright Act for its utilization. By and large, when
a computer program is deemed to be a joint work, the moral rights and
economic rights upon it shall be owned and utilized in a sharing status.
The details of moral rights utilization is provided in article 19 of the
Copyright Act. And the explanation of economic rights exploitation is
regulated in article 40 and 40-1 of the same Act. To be brief, in a
sharing status of jointly moral rights and jointly economic rights on
copyrights, all the rights in a computer program shall not be exercised
except with the consent of all the joint rights holders. However, any
one of the joint rights holders shall not be allowed to refuse this very
consent without a legitimate reason. In addition, the joint rights
holders of a computer program may select a representative among
themselves to exercise their joint rights, either in the moral rights or
in the economic rights aspect. However, there is still one crucial
difference can be told between the jointly moral rights and the jointly
economic rights. That is in article 40, paragraph 1 of the Copyright Act
which expressly stated that there is certain sharing proportion
mechanism defined for the jointly economic rights. These definitions
include *“In the case of a joint work, each author’s share of the
ownership of such a work shall be as stipulated by the joint authors;
where no stipulation has been made, ownership shares shall be determined
according to the degree of each author’s creative contribution. Where
the degree of each author’s creative contribution is not clear, it shall
be presumed that each author owns an equal share.”*  However, this kind
of sharing proportion mechanism is generally believed to be nonexistence
in the jointly moral rights area. Because the moral rights are consisted
of right of publicly release, right of paternity, and right of
integrity, none of these three rights can be transferred from the owner
to others, or be splited in part as well. On account of that, most
people agree that the sharing proportion mechanism only works for the
jointly economic rights. As for the jointly moral rights, every
co-author should be treated equally and equitably in pari causa.

Although the joint rights of copyrights can only be exercised with the
consent of all joint rights holders, there is still one exception
provided in article 90 of the Copyright Act, that is, each holder of
copyrights in a joint work may separately institute legal proceedings
for an infringement of copyrights and demand remedies from the
infringer, either acting as a moral rights holder or based on its share
of economic rights ownership.

#### Authors of derivative works

Regulated in article 6 of the Copyright Act *“A creation adapted from
one or more pre-existing works is a derivative work and shall be
protected as an independent work.”*  According to that, a computer
program can be judged as a derivative work when it is made by the
modifier with certain creativities comparing to the pre-existing one,
and can hence apply all the related provisions about the derivative work
of the Copyright Act for its exploitation. According to article 28 of
the Copyright Act, the authors of the pre-existing/original computer
programs have the exclusive right to adapt their works into derivative
works or to compile their works into compilation works, this
prerequisite is fairly fulfilled by the FOSS licensing agreements.
Because all the FOSS licenses clearly stated that the rights to modify,
copy, and distribute copies of the FOSS projects will be granted to the
recipients. Moreover, the derivative work will be protected as an
independent one as article 6 of the Copyright Act provides, that is to
say, when the derivative work has been made lawfully, the only right the
original authors can perform is to indicate its name, a pseudonym, or no
name on the derivative copies when they are publicly released. However,
sometimes the later version of a FOSS project is just taking an
unmodified adoption from the pre-existing project such as library
components, and adding some new independent functionalities to interact
with the adoption part through a predefined application program
interface. Such an adoption should be deemed as a derivative work, a
compound work, or even a compilation work arises some discussions in
Taiwan, but no solid conclusion has been reached so far. Judging from
the fact that in Taiwan there is actually no copyright type defined as
compound work like German law does, the adoption mentioned above can
therefore be deemed as a derivative work under conventional explanation,
or a compilation work while the adoption is quite separative so as not
to be treated as an adaption. And if it does have been categorized as a
compilation one, it will still be protected as an independent work
according to article 7, paragraph 1 of the Copyright Act. Even so, there
is still certain difference between a derivative FOSS project and a
compilation FOSS project, which is the copyrights included are basically
commingled into a derivative work, yet not to a compilation one. In that
case, if the recipients want to do modification directly to a specific
FOSS component inside the compilation, it should still be proceeded
under the rules stipulated by the respective license agreement of the
component in question.

Except for the name indicating right has been expressly reserved for the
original authors at law, sometimes the original authors will also impose
some other contractual obligations by the FOSS license agreements. The
related information about the validity and enforcement of those
impositions will be presented later in the “Copyright principle” section
of this chapter.

#### The assignment of copyrights

In order to gather all related copyrights in a FOSS project to make an
efficient management or timely disposal of the FOSS project, sometimes
the copyright holders will transfer or set up a trust on their rights to
a sustained legal entity such as a foundation. On account of that, all
the rights of the FOSS project could be governed by the hands of
full-time specialists employed by the legal entity. The collective
management of copyrights is perfectly possible and doable under Taiwan
law. According to article 21 and 36 of the Copyright Act, economic
rights of copyrights can be transferred in whole or in part to another
natural person or legal entity, only if the details of the transferring
have been clearly recorded between the both parties. Besides that,
according to article 1 and 2 of the Trust Law[^taiwan_13], a right of property
can be transferred to the trustee for administration or disposal
purposes by a contract. Furthermore, none of the legal formalities are
required at law for an economic right transfer or fiduciary contract in
Taiwan. And if both parties agree, according to the Electronic
Signatures Act[^taiwan_14], the contract can also be made in an electronic
record way without losing its validities. In a nutshell, the assignment
of economic rights of copyrights for a FOSS project could be
successfully sustained at law in Taiwan, there isn’t any known legal
conflicts with the assignments.

In fact, provided by article 81 of the Copyright Act, economic rights
holders may, with the approval of the Intellectual Property Office,
establish copyright collective management organizations for the purpose
of exercising rights or for collecting and distributing compensation for
use. Details about this copyright collective management organization can
be found in the Copyright Collective Management Organization Act[^taiwan_15].
Although this Act is currently put into practice mainly for
organizations dabbling in pop music or motion pictures, the computer
program is nevertheless not excluding from the applicable list.
Therefore, building a copyright collective management organization
devoted to one or multiple FOSS projects, to initiate management actions
and other civil, criminal, and administrative suits and complaints, is
actually quite feasible and practicable at law in Taiwan.

### Moral copyrights

As aforementioned, moral rights of copyrights are highly valued by the
Copyright Act in Taiwan and they applied to computer programs as well as
other copyright works. Moral rights here consists of three parts, right
of publicly release, right of paternity, and right of integrity on a
copyright work. They belong exclusively to the author and shall not be
transferred or succeeded. And the protection of moral rights of an
author who has died or been extinguished shall be treated as remaining.
In general legal theories and official explanation letters by the
authorities, global renouncement of the future exercise of moral rights
should be deemed as void, yet the renouncement can still be sustained at
law if its scope could be stipulated with details such as subject,
duration, or applied area information. After the brief review of moral
rights protection in Taiwan, one might wonder if we put the FOSS
licensing principles in perspective, will the FOSS licensing principles
and the moral rights protection rules be in conflict with each other in
a way? It seems that the protection duration won’t expire for the moral
rights. Yet according to Open Source Definition specified by Open Source
Initiative article 5 and 6, the author of software distributed under a
FOSS license can not oppose the use of the software by certain people
and groups or for certain areas of application. So if the author of a
FOSS project does declare his everlasting moral rights to lift a ban on
certain use of that computer program, will it cause a compromising
solution between the moral rights protection and the FOSS licensing
principles?

As a matter of fact, such a conflict shall not happen under most
circumstances according to the restrictive interpretation of article 17
of the Copyright Act. In this very article, it regulates that *“The
author has the right to prohibit others from distorting, mutilating,
modifying, or otherwise changing the content, form, or name of the work,
thereby damaging the author’s reputation.”*  This provision mainly
applies onto literature works for the most part. Although it can also be
covered on computer program, with regard to technical neutralities
embodied in the computer programs, a purely functional adaption or
modification should not be deemed as distorting, mutilating, modifying
works in reputation damaging way to the original author. Moreover, when
the original author participates voluntarily in a FOSS project, it is
evidently well understood to it that utilization purpose later on to the
FOSS project will not be limited. This understanding could be fairly
deemed as one acknowledged renouncement of its moral rights with scope
revelation and explanation.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses licenses

As mentioned previously, due to the lack of corresponding mechanisms
either in substantive law or in adjective law for the unilateral act,
most courts in Taiwan tend to treat the computer programs utilization
agreement directly as a copyright contract dealing with right and duty
allocation. Therefore, when it comes to analysis on FOSS licenses
validity and enforcement, the licenses themselves will be judged as
contracts in most cases. In view of that, as long as the FOSS
contractual agreement can be lawfully sustained and can be put into
operation, the license carried on that will also be deemed as valid and
enforceable. So there are two essential questions needed to be heeded:
(i) between whom is a contract reached and when it is reached, and (ii)
has the contract been validly reached with all the legal formalities
required? Based on these two points, we shall further the analysis on
the FOSS licenses validity and enforceability hereunder.

#### Contracting parties

According to article 153, paragraph 1 of the Civil Code *“When the
parties have reciprocally declared their concordant intent, either
expressly or impliedly, a contract shall be constituted.”*  So, for a
contractually based analysis on the FOSS project, two fundamental
questions should be answered, which are: (i) between whom is a contract
reached, and (ii) upon when is the intent mutually declared and
accepted?

About the first question, if the FOSS project in question is made by a
single author, then the answer will be much easier to clarify: the
contract has been constituted between the original author and the
respective recipients to the FOSS project. And when it comes to multiple
authors, the answer will become a little bit indirect to perceive. But
if the multiple authors did contribute to the FOSS project in an
intensive consultation way, then the project itself will be deemed as a
joint work at law. Therefore, the contract has been constituted between
all the co-authors in accordance and the respective recipients to the
FOSS project. And if the project has been modified by the successive
participant with notable originalities, it can be treated as a
derivative work at law. Hence, the contract has been constituted between
the successive author and the respective recipients to the derivative
FOSS project. However, if there is actually no any tangibly consultative
relation between the multiple participants, or the very FOSS project has
been modified repeatedly with slight contribution without certain
originalities, or even the whole project was made in combination with
the other FOSS component as a simple adoption without much modification
between the two parts, all these described above will lead to a much
more complicated situation. Briefly speaking, all the three hypotheses
can not easily be explained in full according to the current Copyright
Act, either in its copyright type categorization or in copyright
management and disposal aspect. Even so, most of the FOSS licenses have
been proved to be of assistance to deal with those puzzles, with the
help of its complementary contractual stipulations. Take MIT license and
Apache License 2.0 of BSD-like FOSS licenses for example, in these two
licenses sublicense mechanism on copyright[^taiwan_16] is expressly provided,
therefore no matter how far the modification to an original MIT License
or Apache-2.0 project has been reached, the modifier will always be
entitled to license a derivative work or merely a modification one in
its own name. Moreover, although there is no such a sublicense mechanism
provided on copyrights in GPL-like FOSS licenses like GNU General Public
License v2.0, v3.0, GNU Lesser General Public License v2.1, v3.0, and
GNU Affero General Public License v3.0, a license relay mechanism has
been well explained in similar way of these license agreements. Take
GPL-3.0 for example, “Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient
automatically receives a license from the original licensors, to run,
modify and propagate that work, subject to this License.” To be brief,
the aforementioned sublicense mechanism and this kind of automatic
licensing to downstream recipients have made up a deficiency to the
Copyright Act regulations for FOSS projects, on account of those
complementary stipulations: the contracting parties of a FOSS project
under a complicated circumstance shall therefore be able to be defined
on a case by case basis.

As for the second question, according to article 161, paragraph 1 and 2
of the Civil Code, *“In cases where according to customs or owing to the
nature of the affair, a notice of acceptance is not necessary, the
contract shall be constituted when, within a reasonable time, there is a
fact, which may be considered as an acceptance of the offer. The
provision of the preceding paragraph shall be mutatis mutandis applied
when at the time of offer the offerer has waived notice of
acceptance.”*  Judging from the provisions above, a contract in Taiwan
could be deemed as concurring reached and constituted, if the notice of
acceptance is pre-declared to be fulfilled by action similar to a
tangible reply. This is exactly what is happening among the FOSS
contractually licensing relations. Most of the FOSS licenses do consist
of this kind of waivers of acceptance notice, take GPL-3.0 for example,
*“by modifying or propagating a covered work, you indicate your
acceptance of this License to do so.”*  In this way both parties of the
FOSS licensing contract have made their intent mutually reached and
concordant. Therefore when a FOSS project has been received and
exploited by the recipients, upon that time the contract between the
rightholders and the respective recipients shall be validly sustained at
law.

#### Validity of the FOSS licenses

For the full validity of a contract, not only the intent should be
reached concordantly between both parties, but also the contents and
formalities must be deemed as not contradicted to the regulations at
law. In Taiwan, the legal principles of validities of a juridical act
are basically provided in article 71, 72, and 73 of the Civil Code. And
all the principles mentioned hereunder are equally applied to the
contract as well as a type of the juridical act, such as:

Article 71  
*A juridical act which violates an imperative or prohibitive provision
of the act is void except voidance is not implied in the provision.*

Article 72  
*A juridical act which is against public policy or morals is void.*

Article 73  
*A juridical act which does not follow the formality required by the act
is void unless otherwise provided by the act.*

Moreover, because of the “All Rights Reserved” principle set forth by
the Copyright Act, exploiting computer programs without the author’s
expressly consent could be a copyright violation. That means without a
legal license, the utilization of softwares downloaded from the internet
could jeopardize oneself in the danger of a copyright infringement. And
even the user claims that the softwares in question were received as
they have already been put into Public Domain, when the legal issues
arouse this will still need to be proved by the user. As a result, most
people will not try to dispute the very existence and validity for a
FOSS contract if they just receive this FOSS project without other legal
stands. Because if they do assert that the FOSS contract between the
authors to them don’t exist, then this implies no legally valid
copyright license has been granted to them, and the users hence might
not be able to use those softwares at all. Judging from the legal
deductions and case analyses above, the contractual FOSS license
agreements should be sustained at law and therefore be able to be
enforced without disputes in Taiwan.

Contractual stipulations contrary to these three articles are deemed not
to exist. On the other hand, if none of the regulations above have been
violated, then according to article 153 of the Civil Code, both parties
in a contract relation can therefore constitute an agreement to exchange
and distribute their duties and rights freely on their own. The doctrine
is treated as the “Principle of Freedom of Contract” in Taiwan. Judging
from the fact that the composition of a FOSS contract has nothing in
conflict with any compulsory regulations as being mentioned in article
71 and take the public policies and good morals into consideration as
being asked in article 72, such an uncertain legal concept can only be
further explained on a case by case basis. On account of that, a FOSS
contract won’t violate this provision directly only because the
utilization based on that contract is unlimited in purposes. Finally,
none of the legal formalities are required at law for an economic right
transfer or disposal contract in Taiwan. So neither being made in
writing, notarization, nor other formalities is demanded in a FOSS
contract. That is to say, the contract made in FOSS licensing way also
doesn’t have any inconsistency to article 73 of the Civil Code. Briefly
speaking, a FOSS license contract is evaluated to be sustained according
to the “Principle of Freedom of Contract” and the reviewing based on the
three criteria listed above.

### Waiver and liability

Typically, there will be certain exoneration clauses declared as a
disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability in the FOSS licenses.
Those clauses relieve the authors and contributors of the FOSS project
from as many liabilities as possible. Judging from the fact that most of
the FOSS projects are distributed on a royalty-free basis, and put the
“Right and Duty Equity Principle” into consideration, this kind of
liability prerelease mechanism will be reasonably sustained at law to
some extent in Taiwan. However, it is explicitly demanded in article 222
of the Civil Code, that the *“Responsibility for intentional or gross
negligent acts shall not be released in advance.”*  Abide by that, if
respective one FOSS license does mean to relieve the authors and
contributors from all kinds of liabilities including the one that is
caused by an intentional or gross negligent act, the exceeding part
according to article 222 and 111 of the Civil Code will be deemed as
void at law. However, for this FOSS license, the other part within the
scope permitted at law shall remain valid. This “partly void yet partly
valid” mechanism presented in article 111 happens to echo article 7,
paragraph 2 of the GPL-2.0[^taiwan_17]. All in all, if the FOSS project is
distributed as noncommercial purpose and free of charge, then the
disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability clauses will be
respected to a maximum extent. However, the responsibility for
intentional or gross negligent acts will not be relieved in advance, any
waivers come to this degree will be treated as void at law.

Even so, when it comes to commercial distribution with fees charged, the
question about whether the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of
liability can stand at law shall be examined and evaluated on a case by
case basis. Moreover, because of the preconcerted and fixed
characteristic of a FOSS license, the FOSS license itself could be
easily recognized as the “Standard Contract” defined in article 247-1 of
the Civil Code and article 12 of the Consumer Protection Law in Taiwan.
One of the legal effects of being treated as a standard contract is that
if the court finds that certain stipulations in the contract are turning
to be obviously unfair, such as releasing or reducing the responsibility
of one party and increasing the responsibility of the other party which
is contrary to the principle of the equality and reciprocity, it can be
declared as void directly by court at law. In view of article 354 and
355 of the Civil Code, it also tells that *“The seller of a thing shall
warrant that the thing sold is free from any defect in quality which may
destroy or impair its value, or its fitness for ordinary efficacy, or
its fitness for the efficacy of the contract of sale.”*  According to
this clause, when a FOSS project has been put to use as a selling
product, the prearranged disclaimer of warranty and limitation of
liability clauses would be regulated and modulated to a certain degree.
Unless the seller has already expressly revealed the defect to the
buyer, otherwise he will still be held responsible for the quality of it
offering. That a FOSS project being part of the offering or not does not
affect this legal demand on a compulsory basis.

### The copyleft principle

Copyleft is not necessarily an ideological term though it is indeed
created to make a contrast to the notion of copyright. Its discourse,
however, still works within the scope of the copyright basis. In other
words, the notion of copyleft can be summarized as “A way of sharing
that computer programs within the framework of the copyright system,
albeit in ways different from the common practices.” Based on that,
authors of FOSS projects can therefore still claim the rights given to
them by the copyright law and at the same time set the rules by
stipulations on how other people can use their works. Furthermore,
authors can only allow other people to perform applications,
modifications, and adaptations to the original computer programs on
condition that the distribution of the original and derivative works
would be in exactly the same way by a FOSS license agreement. So it is
assured that these works can continue their free circulation. This is
the central idea of the notion copyleft “Authors requiring their
original and derivative works to be continuously available under the
same rules to the public.”

#### Principle

The classic model of such a licensing mechanism is the respective
versions of GNU licenses[^taiwan_18] drafted by Free Software Foundation. Some
critics even give the characteristic supported by copyleft principle in
the GNU licenses a new term, such as “License Capture” or “License
Inheritance”. Take GPL for example, License Inheritance means an
adopter’s entire project might be considered as a derivative work of a
GPL-licensed component if one of the following conditions is fulfilled
when the adopter copies the codes either in source form way or in binary
form way from a GPL-licensed component into its ongoing software
project. First, the portion copied comprises a substantial part of the
software project; or second, the GPL-licensed component provides core
function for the software project and inseparably interacts with the
other components of such software project. If any of the conditions
above has been positively reached, then the software project in question
will be deemed as a creation adapted from the pre-existing GPL-licensed
component, therefore renders it as a derivative work of the GPL-licensed
component. As a result, the adopter can only distribute its accomplished
software project under the same GPL if it chooses to.

Frankly speaking, in the area of computer programs, defining the scope
of a “work based on the original work” has been recognized as relatively
challenging. This is because components in a mid or large size software
project often call or access each other to cooperate. In addition, when
different components are developed, each author may develop its own
components independently without consulting others for accessibility and
license compatibility. Unless the correlating and co-pending
relationships of different components are determined on a case by case
basis, it would be difficult to directly determine whether there is
actually such tight connection of inheritance and reliance so as to
determine whether the entire software project is derived from one
specific component.

Nevertheless, simply putting a GPL-licensed component into a software
project does not necessarily trigger its License Inheritance based on
the GPL. In fact, many users somehow misunderstood and thus wrongfully
interpreted the License Inheritance and used the “all-inclusive”
terminology as a simplified but not specified metaphor to describe the
License Inheritance effect. As a matter of fact, lots of the core
members and opinion leaders of the respective GPL projects have now and
then stated something similar: If a GPL-licensed component is not
strongly related to the other components in the entire software project,
it renders the License Inheritance of the GPL component as unable to be
expanded to the other components of the software project. Such
standpoints might include that the GPL-licensed component communicating
with the other components through a dynamic link or the developer of the
software project in question might be able to find similar components in
function yet under the other licenses to easily replace the GPL-licensed
one. However, if the GPL-licensed component communicates with the other
components through a static link, or it represents a core function of
the whole software project, such GPL-licensed component hence becomes
highly correlated with the entire software project and can not be easily
replaced in any case. Accordingly, separating such GPL-licensed
component would cause a chain reaction and affect the entire software
project. In other words, the other components of such software project
will be considered as derivative works of the GPL-licensed component,
and the entire software project will fall within the expansive scope of
the License Inheritance of the GPL.

#### Validity

To find the answer about how the copyleft principle can be sustained and
held valid under Taiwan’s legal system, three questions should be
fundamentally guided. The first question is, whether author of the
original work can validly make an arrangement for how the derivative
works need to be distributed. Second, if affirmative, how to explain the
copyleft principle on a copyright analysis, namely, can the
interpretation of copyleft be sustained in form at law? Third, can the
enforcement of copyleft be validated at law without falling into the
dispute of right abusing, and therefore be held valid substantively?

About the first question, it could be well explained according to
article 28 of the Copyright Act, which is, an author of the original
work has the exclusive right to create a derivative work, or compile
into a compilation of the original one. Therefore, if a software
component is not developed from scratch but rewritten from or derived
from other person’s preexisting work, the original author’s consent
needs to be acquired before such later developer may perform certain
modifications or adaptations on the preexisting work. Similar clauses
can be found in section 101 of title 17 of the United States Code *“A
derivative work is a work based upon one or more preexisting works.”* 
So, the original author does have the right to determine which person
can and which person can not perform the modifications and adaptations
onto its original computer program. Moreover, take the “Principle of
Freedom of Contract” into consideration, the original author hereby is
entitled to lay down the utilization of the derivative work for a
particular use, or link certain conditions onto it.

It turns out the author does have the right to make certain arrangements
to the derivative works based on its exclusive right on modifications
and adaptations of the original work as a trade off between it and the
recipients. Such copyleft content in a FOSS license agreement seems to
be sort of terms of interchange, but how we define that in the legal
system of Taiwan? Can it be determined in nature and found the right
place at law to fit in? Here comes the second question and its answer,
according to article 99, paragraph 2 of the Civil Code the copyleft
principle could be deemed as a resolutory condition adhered to the
contract because when the violation of it has been reached, the license
granting contract between the original author and the recipients shall
cease to be in existence. Take GPL-3.0 for example, it declares such a
statement in the termination section as *“You may not propagate or
modify a covered work except as expressly provided under this License.
Any attempt otherwise to propagate or modify it is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.”*  Therefore,
copyleft principle could be treated and sustained as a resolutory
condition at law in form, it will not be activated by the time when the
recipients just receive the FOSS project, however if the recipients do
make modifications or perform certain adaptations on the FOSS project
and distribute the derivative works in a wrong way which is forbidden by
the FOSS license. In that case, this disobedience to the copyleft
principle will fulfilled this resolutory condition and hence terminated
the contract between both parties. After that, the legitimate status for
the recipients to continuously perform the modifications, adaptations,
or distributions on the original work and derivative works has been
breached or revoked. In view of that, the author of the original work
can therefore initiate the complaint or litigation to the recipients for
the copyright infringements.

Based on the above legal deduction, copyleft principle stipulated in the
FOSS licenses could be supported at law as a resolutory condition
provided by the Civil Code in Taiwan. To be precisely specified, a FOSS
license agreement can be deemed to be a “bilateral contract with
resolutory conditions”[^taiwan_19]. However, according to the legal principles,
there is no rights entitled at law can be abused by the holders in any
extreme ways, this is also fairly elaborated in article 148 of the Civil
Code in Taiwan as *“A right can not be exercised for the main purpose of
violating public interests or damaging the others, and it shall be
exercised and a duty shall be performed in accordance with the means of
good faith as well.”*  Judging from these criteria upon copyleft
principle in the FOSS licenses, could it be likely to be deemed as
rights abusing in a way or not? As a matter of fact, there is no any
solid legal inference has been concluded on that. Even so, most critics
in Taiwan think that except for the worst situation might be found on a
case by case basis, the copyleft principle is basically having nothing
to do with the right abusing. Take the currently most applied FOSS
licenses with copyleft principle for example, such as GPL-2.0, GPL-3.0,
LGPL-2.1, LGPL-3.0, MPL-2.0, EPL-1.0, and AGPL-3.0, the extensive scope
regulated by copyleft principle in them is still fundamentally limited
to the typical area of the derivative work defined by the copyright law
or other related software acts. In the MPL-2.0 and EPL-1.0, the
regulated scope has even been restrained to the file-based or
module-based boundaries. Although in the GPL-3.0 and AGPL-3.0, the
drafters take the term “work based on” to replace “derivative work” in
the previous license versions, it still shows that the extensive scope
based on copyleft principle is limited to some extent. On account of
that, the third question about whether the enforcement of copyleft
principle can be validated at law or not in the substantive point of
view, the answer should be positive. Moreover, sometimes authors do
choose a FOSS license with copyleft principle for certain reasons, one
might hence be able to set forth its dual-licensing business model with
a copyleft FOSS license and a proprietary software license on the same
software project at the same time, or one might therefore make a
confirmation that the software released can continue its free
circulation and be brought back to its own utilization one day in
exactly the same way as it was given away at the beginning. As a whole,
judging from the fact that the copyleft principle might be chosen by an
author with discretion for its own lawful copyright management, and
under most circumstances it will also not be deemed as exceeding beyond
the protection of public interests. Therefore it should be sustained and
held valid at law in Taiwan, either in form or in substantive evaluation
aspect.

### Damages

As set forth previously, some articles of Copyright Act in Taiwan are
deemed as special provisions to the general Criminal Code. Therefore,
when a copyright infringement has been made on purpose, it is the
prosecutor who can initiate the prosecution upon complaint and suggests
the imposition of fine, detention, or imprisonment onto the intentional
violator. Considering that an intentional or malicious copyright
infringement could already be punished by criminal measures, there is
actually no punitive damages to double or triple amount could be claimed
under the Copyright Act. And this rule is applied to computer programs
as well as other copyright works. According to article 88 of the
copyright Act, a person who unlawfully infringes other person’s economic
rights out of intention or negligence shall be liable for damages. With
regard to the damages, the injured party may make claim in any of the
two manners provided in article 88, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act at
its choice. The first option is to request the submission from the
infringer about the amount of benefit obtained on account of this
infringing activity. Basically the damages will be equal or close to the
obtained benefit, which is the revenue derived from the infringement
deducting the costs and other necessary expenses. However, if the
infringer is unable to establish the details for the costs and related
expenses, then the obtained benefit in question should be deemed as the
total revenue derived from the infringement.

The second option to calculate the damages is in accordance with the
general applicable principles of the unlawful act, provided in article
216 of the Civil Code. Abiding by that, the damages shall be the injury
suffered and the interests lost to the injured party owing to the
infringement. However, if the injured party is unable to prove damages
in detail, an analogy calculating alternative can hereby intervene.
According to article 88, paragraph 3, subparagraph 1 of the Copyright
Act, the injured party may base the damages on the differences between
the amount of expected benefit from the exercise of such rights under
normal circumstances and the amount of benefit from the exercise of the
same rights after the infringement. This analogy license claim is quite
useful and practical for an author in need of claiming its compensation
on the infringement of a FOSS project. Although there are certain doable
and flexible business models could be performed for benefit earning on
the FOSS projects such as service providing, product value-adding,
dual-licensing way and so on, quite a number of the FOSS projects are
still basically provided on a copyright royalty-free or even patent
royalty-free basis. By making the analogy license claim, the injured
party can therefore save the situation if the calculation to the injury
suffered and interests lost are proven to be too complicated or
time-consuming in reality. Or, if it is still difficult for the injured
party to prove actual damages in accordance with the two solutions
provided above, the injured party may request the court directly set
compensation at an amount of not less than ten thousand and not more
than one million New Taiwan Dollars based on the seriousness of the
matter. If the damaging activity was intentional and / or serious, the
compensation set by the court may be increased to five million New
Taiwan Dollars maximum.

## FOSS cases in Taiwan

By the time the Taiwan chapter finished, there is still no FOSS cases
have been reported (July 2013). However, if it comes to the “Freeware”
project lawsuits, as in similar general public licensing way, “Chinese
Chess v.1.0 Software” case might be a fine reference. This verdict has
been ruled by the Taipei District Court of criminal case number 2055 in
1998 as its first instance of court, and by the Taiwan High Court of
criminal case number 5401 in the same year as its second instance of
court. The author of Chinese Chess v.1.0 is Sheniun Wu. Mr. Wu once
uploaded the Chinese Chess v.1.0 developed by him to the educational
TANet of National Tsing Hua University in Taiwan. He distributed it
under a simple license condition as “being free for everyone to
redistribute the program with limitation of no more than the physical
cost of the redistribution can be charged.” After a period of time, the
program has been included into a CD medium by the computer program
vendors, and hence been sold together with the CD copies for commercial
profits. When Mr. Wu realized the situation, he submitted a legal
complaint to the authority, and therefore this case has been brought to
court by prosecutor. Due to the software in question is fundamentally a
Freeware, none of the copyright assignment and the copyleft principle
topics have been discussed by courts at all. However, either the court
of first instance or the court of second instance ruled the contract
binding and relation between the software author and the software
recipients are perfectly established by the general public licensing
way, and should be held valid according to article 161 of the Civil Code
when the notice of acceptance in a contract is predeclared to be
fulfilled by action similar to a tangible reply. This standpoint by
courts should be sustained thereafter in FOSS cases as well, because the
“taking/downloading without additional notice of acceptance” mechanism
is fairly applied to them without a difference to Freewares.

[^taiwan_bio]: *Lucien Cheng-Hsia Lin (b. 1976) is a legal specialist and management advisor at "Open Source
Software Foundry, OSSF", a mission-oriented project launched and
sponsored by the highest academic institution in Taiwan, Academia
Sinica, from 2003. He is in charge of the analysis and interpretation of
FOSS licenses, the record and track of FOSS business trends and models
for OSSF office, and serves as the legal lead of Creative Commons Taiwan
from 2014. He is also a guest lecturer at National Chiao Tung University
located in Hsinchu, Taiwan. 
<http://www.openfoundry.org/en/about>*

[^taiwan_1]: Taiwan Copyright Act, Art. 5(1)(j), 22(2)(3), 59, 60, 80-2, and
    87.The official translations in English can be reached by “Laws &
    Regulations Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0070017>

[^taiwan_2]: The official translations of the Taiwan Civil Code in English can
    be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of China”
    at: <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=B0000001>

[^taiwan_3]: The official translations of the Taiwan Consumer Protection Law in
    English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0170001>

[^taiwan_4]: The official translations of the Taiwan Regulations of Copyright
    Dispute Mediation in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations
    Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0070020>

[^taiwan_5]: The official translations of the Taiwan Intellectual Property Case
    Adjudication Act in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations
    Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=A0030215>

[^taiwan_6]: The official translations of the Taiwan Code of Civil Procedure in
    English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=B0010001>

[^taiwan_7]: The official translations of the Taiwan Code of Criminal Procedure
    in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=C0010001>

[^taiwan_8]: The court shall review the written mediation settlement statement
    with due dispatch. Unless it is contrary to act or regulation,
    public order, or good morals, or compulsory execution would be
    impossible, judge shall sign copies thereof and affix the seal of
    the court thereto.

[^taiwan_9]: Take the verdict documented as “Intellectual Property Related
    Criminal Appealing Litigation Number 41 by Intellectual Property
    Court in 2008.” For example, judges of the trial bench made a clear
    statement in their court judgment about legal opinions for not
    applying sweat of the brow doctrine directly in copyright area
    without proper and sufficient expression about minimum originality
    requirement.

[^taiwan_10]: Cited from the “Copyright Related Explanation Letter Number
    8118200 by Ministry of the Interior of 2 Oct. 1992.”

[^taiwan_11]: Cited from the speech given by Clay Shirky, How the Internet will
    (one day) transform government at TED:
    <http://www.ted.com/talks/clay_shirky_how_the_internet_will_one_day_transform_government.html>

[^taiwan_12]: If there is no applicable act for a civil case, the case shall be
    decided according to customs. If there is no such custom, the case
    shall be decided according to the jurisprudence.

[^taiwan_13]: The official translations of the Taiwan Trust Law in English can
    be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of China”
    at: <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=I0020024>

[^taiwan_14]: The official translations of the Taiwan Electronic Signatures Act
    in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0080037>

[^taiwan_15]: The official translations of the Taiwan Copyright Collective
    Management Organization Act in English can be reached by “Laws &
    Regulations Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0070019>

[^taiwan_16]: However, the patent sublicense is expressly declared and provided
    in the GPL-3.0, LGPL-3.0, and AGPL-3.0, such a mechanism is
    currently seldom to be observed in other FOSS licenses.

[^taiwan_17]: If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable
    under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is
    intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in
    other circumstances.

[^taiwan_18]: GPL-2.0, GPL-3.0, LGPL-2.1, LGPL-3.0, AGPL-3.0.

[^taiwan_19]: Chyan Yang, Hsien-Jyh Liao, and Chung-Chen Chen, “Analysis on GPL
    in terms of the legal system in Taiwan” at:
    [http://ccckmit.wdfiles.com/local—files/re%3Apaper/GPL.pdf](http://ccckmit.wdfiles.com/local—files/re%3Apaper/GPL.pdf)
    
    