# United Kingdom

*Andrew Katz[^uk_bio1] and Iain G. Mitchell QC[^uk_bio2]*

## Introduction to software protection under United Kingdom law

### Body of law

Unlike the other countries covered in this book, the United Kingdom
comprises not one but three separate jurisdictions: England & Wales,
Northern Ireland and Scotland. Each jurisdiction has its own legal
system, with its own *corpus* of laws, both common law and statutory.
This is particularly true of the Law of Scotland[^uk_1]. In some areas, the
laws of Scotland and of England can be substantially different. By
contrast the laws of England and of Northern Ireland share a common
heritage, and are substantially similar, though some minor differences
can occur.[^uk_2]

The modern law of Intellectual Property in each of these jurisdictions
has developed since the Act of Union in 1707 and is almost entirely
based upon statutes of the United Kingdom Parliament commencing with the
foundation of the concept of copyright, the post-Union Statute of Anne
1709[^uk_3]. The legislation has tended to cover the whole of the United
Kingdom with only minor differences to accommodate the different Court
structures, and has been interpreted uniformly by judges in all
jurisdictions. Thus, it becomes possible to treat this area from a
United Kingdom perspective. In this chapter, the phrase “United Kingdom
Law” is used to mean English Law, Northern Irish Law and Scots Law taken
together, and differences amongst English Law, Scots Law and Northern
Irish Law are noted where appropriate.

In the United Kingdom, then, copyright protection of software (as with
all forms of copyright protection) is regulated under the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988[^uk_4] (referred to as the “Copyright Act”),
as updated and amended from time to time. In particular, the Copyright
(Computer Programs) Regulations 1992[^uk_5] implemented the Council
Directive of 14 May 1991 on the Legal Protection of computer programs
(91/250/EEC)[^uk_6] into United Kingdom law (referred to as the “Software
Directive”).

### Copyright Act: Object of protection

Computer programs (including the preparatory material) are protected by
copyright and are equivalent to literary works within the meaning of the
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works. This
protection is transposed into the law of the United Kingdom by virtue of
section 3(1)(b) of the Copyright Act. The same criteria apply to the
copyright protection of computer software as applied to literary works.
Thus, only original computer programs benefit from copyright protection.
This means that the computer program needs to be an intellectual
creation of its author, or, if the program is a computer-generated work
itself[^uk_7], the person who made the arrangements necessary for the
creation of the work[^uk_8].

In terms of section 1 of the Act, copyright is a right of property. It
is incorporeal in nature and therefore copyright falls to be regarded as
(according to the terminology of Scots Law and most European systems)
incorporeal moveable property, and, (according to the terminology of
English law and Northern Irish Law) incorporeal personal property.

### Authors/Copyright owners

The Copyright Act provides that the copyrights in a work belong to the
author, unless the author is an employee who created the work “in the
course of his employment” in which case it belongs to the employer,
unless there is an agreement to the contrary[^uk_9]. There is a significant
body of case law determining the meaning of "in the course of his
employment" and "employer" in the context of employment and tax law
cases, and it is assumed that these cases would be followed in a
copyright law context. An important effect of this is that the default
ownership position, where an entity engages a contractor to create
software (in other words, where the contractor is not an employee of the
entity, but engaged under a contract for services), is that the
copyright in the software will remain with the contractor. Thus unless
the contract for services sets out explicitly that the ownership in the
software shall be assigned to the entity engaging the contractor’s
services, the entity will not obtain the copyright in the software, and
will, instead, obtain some form of implied licence, the scope of which
is unclear.[^uk_10]

### Exclusive rights

According to section 2(1) of the Copyright Act the owner of copyright
(including copyright in computer programs) has the exclusive economic
rights set out in Chapter II of the Copyright Act (see section 16(1)).
These are (following the sub-paragraph designations in the Act) the
right :

(a) to copy the work;

(b) to issue copies of the work to the public;

(c) to rent or lend the work to the public;

(d) to perform, show or play the work in public;

(e) to communicate the work to the public;

(f) to make an adaptation of the work or to do any of the above in
relation to an adaptation.

All these rights theoretically apply in the case of a computer program,
even if that seems counter-intuitive. For example by virtue of section
19(2), “performance” would include any mode of visual presentation. It
can be argued that this includes running a program that presents an
output on the screen. Equally, this could be covered by 20(2)(b) which
includes "the making available to the public of the work by electronic
transmission that members of the public may access it from a place and
at a time individually chosen by them"[^uk_11]

Section 18(1) deals with exhaustion of distribution rights: the
restricted act of issuing copies to the public only applies in relation
to copies put into circulation in the EEA which have previously not been
put into circulation by or with the consent of the copyright owner, or
the act of putting into circulation outside the EEA copies not
previously put into circulation in the EEA or elsewhere.

It is not clear under UK law whether “copies” in this context refers
only to physical copies, or whether it can also include electronic
copies.

Translation of a computer program into another “language or code” (which
would presumably include compilation and assembly) is explicitly
expressed to be making an adaptation (section 21(4)).

### Exceptions to exclusive rights

Lawful users of computer programs are guaranteed the following rights
(which are neither an infringement of copyright, nor a breach of any
term of a contract purporting to restrict them[^uk_12])

(a) The making of backup copies (to the extent they are necessary)

(b) decompilation; and

(c) observing, studying and testing

(see further below)

(1) In the absence of specific contractual provisions, no authorization
by the rightholder is required for acts necessary for the use (including
copying or adapting[^uk_13]) of the computer program by the lawful acquirer
or for error correction[^uk_14].

(2) A lawful user of a computer program may not be prevented from making
any backup copy, insofar as that copy is necessary to use the
program[^uk_15].

(3) A lawful user of a copy of a computer program is entitled, without
the authorization of the rightholder, to observe, study or test the
functioning of the program in order to determine the ideas and
principles which underlie any element of the program if he does so while
performing any of the acts of loading, displaying, running, transmitting
or storing the program which he is entitled to do[^uk_16]. This right may
not be excluded by contract.

The decompilation right in the Act[^uk_17] essentially echoes Article 6 of
the Directive. It may not be excluded by contract, but is subject to
conditions. The decompilation must be necessary to obtain information
necessary to create an interoperable program, and that information may
only used for that purpose. If the lawful user already has ready access
to relevant information, then the decompilation is not permitted. The
information must not be used to create a program which substantially
similar in expression to the program decompiled.

This is of relevance to open source when an attempt is made to write
open source code which is intended to interoperate with proprietary
software. There is an argument that by creating an interoperable program
for which the source code is available, the coder will be in breach of
the obligation to keep the information confidential.

The exercise of these statutory rights is often difficult in practice
because their scope is unclear.

### Moral rights

Software is not subject to moral rights under United Kingdom law (and
neither are computer generated works)[^uk_18].

### Term of protection

The same term as for works of literature and art applies: 70 years as
from the 1st January in the year following the death of the author[^uk_19].
However, if the work is computer generated, copyright expires at the end
of the period 50 years from the end of the calendar year in which the
work was made. In practice, although the object code created by a
compiler is a computer generated work, since it is also an adaptation of
a literary work (the original source code), the licence of the
rightholder in the source code would still be required for the duration
of the copyright in the underlying source code, even if the copyright in
the object code *qua* computer generated work had expired[^uk_20].

Where the authors are joint, the reference to the death of an author
should be construed as the death of the last remaining author[^uk_21].

### Copyright assignment and assignation

As we have seen, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, any
copyright work created by an employee for an employer in the course of
the employee’s employment is automatically owned by the employer,
without any additional formality.[^uk_22] However, because there may be
circumstances where it is not clear when the employee is acting within
the course of his employment (for example, at home, in his own time, or
on a project other than the one he was employed to work on) it is not
unusual for employment contracts governed by the laws of the UK
jurisdictions to contain clauses which are intended to clarify
ownership. It is important to stress that when an employee creates a
work in the course of his employment, this is not regarded as the
employee being the original author of the work but somehow assigning the
copyright to his employer, but, rather as being the employer who is the
author in the first place, even although the instrumentality by which
the work comes into existence is through the work of the employee.

In all cases where copyright belongs to one person or entity and is
sought to be transferred to another, to effect that transfer there
requires to be a written assignment or assignation, signed by the rights
holder.[^uk_23] However, no special form of words is required, nor is any
special formality of execution or deed (such as a probative, or
self-proving deed, though, of course such formal execution, though
unusual, would not be excluded). Similarly, and whatever the experience
in certain European jurisdictions may be, notaries are never used. Like
any other business document, all that is needed is a simple document in
writing, however informally expressed, and merely signed by the granter.
[^uk_24] Some commentators have suggested that a contract (or deed) is a
necessary formality for an assignment to be enforceable (e.g. PLC).
Howewer, the different requirements of Scots law regarding unilateral
obligation make it less likely that a contract or formal deed would be
necessary in the case of an assignation, since under the Law of
Scotland, only such a written assignation will be effective to effect
the transfer of the copyright, but, under English Law, the court can,
through the application of trust principles, recognise that in certain
circumstances the beneficial ownership of copyright may pass in the
absence of a written assignment, whilst the legal interest in the
copyright remains with the original rightsholder. In itself, the legal
interest in copyright has no value if it is severed from the beneficial
interest (although the owner of the legal interest can pass good title
to a third party who acquires that title for value without notice of the
beneficial claim). The detailed ramifications of the severability of the
legal and beneficial interests are beyond the scope of this work.

For clarity, it is always advisable to ensure that assignments or
assignations are in writing and signed by the rightsholder, and, under
English and Northern Irish law at least, are subject to consideration
(even if it is a nominal £1), or are made by deed. No consideration is
required under Scots law.

It is possible to make partial assignment of a work: any of the
exclusive rights granted to the copyright owner can be assigned
separately. It is also possible to assign some or all of these rights
for a limited period of time[^uk_25]. Section 36(2)(b) of the predecessor
legislation, the Copyright Act 1956, expressly permitted the assignment
of rights in other countries in which the copyright holder had such
rights. No such specific provision appears in the current Copyright Act,
but it is not to doubted that such an assignment or assignation would be
effective in respect of those rights.

It is also possible to assign prospective copyright in a future, but
currently non-existent work, such that when the work comes into
existence, the assignment or assignation will automatically take
effect[^uk_26].

The assignment or assignation of software is treated exactly like the
assignment or assignation of all other literary works.

In addition to assignment or assignation, ownership of copyright can
also be transmitted by testamentary disposition (i.e. by will) or by
operation of law[^uk_27] “Operation of law” may be, for example, succession
according to the rules of intestate succession, or passing to an
administrator, receiver or liquidator of a company or a trustee in
bankruptcy. Although the principle of such transmission is common to all
three jurisdictions, the actual outworking of that principle will differ
according to the laws of succession, the insolvency laws and other
relevant laws of each jurisdiction. In relation to the examples given,
there is a substantial commonality amongst the jurisdictions in the laws
of corporate insolvency (which are regulated by UK statute though with
some differences to accommodate the legal systems and procedures of the
different jurisdictions), not much commonality (at least between Scots
Law and the law of the other jurisdictions) in the laws of personal
insolvency, and virtually no similarity at all in the laws of
succession. It is beyond the scope of the present work to discuss these
matters.

### Technical devices and effective technological measures

A "technical device" is any device intended to prevent or restrict acts
that are not authorised by the copyright owner of that work and are
restricted by copyright[^uk_28]. The definition is used in relation to
computer programs. The Copyright Act has a similar definition for
"technological measures", which apply to copyright works other than a
computer program[^uk_29]. Computer programs and other copyright works are
treated slightly differently in this regard (note that the bundle of
files containing what would colloquially be described as a computer
program may consist of files which are computer programs within the
legal sense — the executables, for example, and also files such as
documentation or content which would be considered as other copyright
works).

Where a technical device has been applied to a computer program, a
person who manufactures, imports or distributes, supplies, offers or
advertises to supply or has in his possession for commercial purposes
any means the sole intended purpose of which is to facilitate the
unauthorised removal or circumvention of the technical device, or
publishes information which is intended to assist people in
circumventing it, then that person is liable for a copyright
infringement claim from any of (a) the distributor of the software; (b)
the exclusive licensee; or (c) the owner or exclusive licensee of the
technical device.[^uk_30]

Similarly, where effective technological measures have been applied to a
copyright work which is not a computer program, if a person circumvents
those measures knowing, or having reasonable grounds to know that he is
circumventing them, then the owner or exclusive licensee of the
underlying copyright work has the same rights as against the person
circumventing as if he were an infringer of the copyright in that
work[^uk_31]. There is an exception for people undertaking cryptographic
research, so long as the rights of the underlying copyright owner are
not prejudiced[^uk_32]. A person unlawfully removing or altering
“electronic rights management information” is similarly liable[^uk_33].
Likewise, if a device or service for circumvention of a technological
measure is manufactured, supplied etc., then the copyright owner,
exclusive licensee and owner of the effective technological measure have
similar rights against the manufacturer, supplier etc[^uk_34].

### Enforcement measures

The Copyright Act contains provisions intended to assist in the
enforcement of copyrights.

There are several criminal offences relating to Copyright. In summary,
these are:

-   making an infringing work for sale or hire;

-   importing an infringing work into the UK (other than for the
    importer’s private or domestic use);

-   possessing in the course of a business an infringing copy with a
    view to committing any act infringing the copyright;

-   selling, hiring, offering to sell or hire, exhibiting in public or
    distributing an infringing copy in the course of a business.

It will be noted that the above offences are all connected with
commercial activities. In each case, an infringing copy is a copy which
infringes copyright, and which the defendant[^uk_35] knows or has reason to
believe infringes copyright[^uk_36].

There is an offence, intended to criminalise uploading, which applies
where a person, otherwise than in the course of a business, distributes
an infringing copy to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the
owner of the copyright[^uk_37].

There is a further offence of making or possessing an article designed
or adapted to make copies of a particular copyright work, where the
defendant knows or has reason to believe that it may be used to make
infringing copies for sale or hire in the course of a business[^uk_38].

It is quite difficult to bring a prosecution under this latter
provision, as the article in question must be making the copies, and its
copying capability must be designed or adapted to make copies of a
particular work. Photocopiers, for example, would not come within this
definition.

It is an offence to communicate an infringing copy to the public in the
course of a business, or where the interests of the copyright owner are
prejudiced, where the defendant knows or has reason to believe that the
communication infringes copyright[^uk_39]. This offence is intended to
cover streaming. Operators of content linking sites may also find
themselves liable for conspiracy to defraud (R. v. Vickerman, 2012).

Although it may be assumed that Parliament intended the scope of
Criminal Offences to be exhaustively set out in the Copyright Act (note,
for example, that there is no offence related to non-commercial
downloading of copyright materials), a zealous private prosecutor has
succeeded in a successful prosecution for conspiracy to defraud.[^uk_40]

More recently, in implementation of WIPO Treaty Obligations and EU
Directives, secondary legislation introduced the idea of “technical
devices” (which apply to computer programs) and “technological measures”
(which apply to copyright works other than computer programs) (see
above). It is an offence to manufacture for sale or hire, supply or
advertise commercially, possess or distribute commercially (or
distribute non-commercially if this prejudicially affects the rights of
the copyright owner) anything which is primarily intended for enabling
or facilitating circumvention[^uk_41]. However, there are no criminal
offences associated with the unauthorised removal of technical devices.

The law also provides a number of remedies to copyright owners,
exclusive licensees, and in certain cases people authorised by those
rights holders, to facilitate the delivery up and/or seizure of
infringing materials[^uk_42].

HM Revenue and Customs also has certain duties in relation to the
impounding and seizure of goods which are imported into the United
Kingdom and which infringe certain intellectual property rights. They
have confirmed informally that a copyright holder of firmware contained
in embedded devices may potentially invoke these powers where the
firmware has been released under the GPL, but the relevant conditions of
the GPL are not being complied with[^uk_43].

## Unprotected software, public domain software and orphan works

Only software that is original in the sense that it is an intellectual
creation of the author benefits from copyright protection. Non-original
software does not come into consideration for copyright protection and
can, in principle, be used freely.

The level of originality required in the United Kingdom is relatively
low. Originality does not equate to novelty (as in patent law): it is
theoretically possible for two identical works to be created
independently and for copyright in each to vest in their respective
authors simultaneously.

In the United Kingdom, copyright arises automatically by operation of
law upon the creation or first publication of a work. No form of
registration is required, or even possible. The author has copyright in
his work, whether he wants it or not. The work will not and cannot enter
the public domain prior to the expiry of the relevant copyright term.
However, this does not mean to say that there could not be devised a
mechanism which might produce an effect similar to the work being in the
public domain. For example, under English Law, it is likely that an
unrestricted, irrevocable licence, expressed as a deed poll for the
benefit of all third parties, coupled with a promise not to sue for
infringement would be provide an equivalent to a dedication to the
public domain. In Scots Law a similar mechanism could be used, though
without the need for a deed poll.[^uk_44]

Another option available in English Law would be to license the software
as part of a contract, explicitly extending the licence irrevocably to
all third parties. This licence would be enforceable by such third
parties pursuant to the Contracts (Right of Third Parties) Act 1999. In
this case, it is arguable that by virtue of the doctrine of promissory
estoppel, if the copyright owner promised not to pursue copyright
claims, even under a bare licence, and reliant on that promise, someone
made use of the software in such a way as would be detrimental to them
if the right was removed, the original copyright owner would be unable
to terminate the licence.

The approach in Scotland would require to be rather different. Again, a
licence could be granted by the copyright holder to another individual
irrevocably extending the licence to all third parties. This would be
recognised at common law in Scotland as conferring upon the third
parties a *ius quaesitum tertio* enabling them to rely upon the terms of
the licence. Scots Law does not require there to be consideration before
there can be a contract, so there would be no need to invoke principles
of personal bar.[^uk_45] However, since a simple unilateral promise would
be effective in Scots Law, there seems little point in venturing into
the additional complications of bilateral contracts with a *ius
quaesitum tertio*.

However, such schemes would produce only an analogue of releasing the
work into the public domain: it would not in fact do so. There might
always be the risk of other legal principles intervening — for example,
if the copyright holder were to become insolvent, might his trustee in
bankruptcy (or, if an entity, its liquidator) seek to renounce or reduce
the contract under the relevant legislation, no consideration having
been paid for the licence? Or, if an individual, might there be an
attempt (say by the author’s disappointed heirs) to have the contract
reduced on the grounds that the deceased author was *incapax* when he
granted it? These might seem like fanciful questions, but the point is
merely to illustrate that a renunciation of copyright and release into
the public domain is just not legally possible in the United Kingdom.

The concept of “orphan works” has recently been introduced into UK
copyright law (section 116A Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988), but
the relevant provisions are not due to come into force until October
2014. They do not directly implement the Orphan Works Directive
(2012/28/EU) and there is currently some debate about the interaction
between the two systems.

The copyright law of the United Kingdom draws no distinction between
FOSS and proprietary software. All such software is protected by
copyright, and the copyright owners have the exclusive rights over the
software. Third party use is lawful only if it takes place outside the
scope of copyright (after expiry of the relevant term, for example) as
an exception to the copyright, or under a licence of the software. Such
licence may be a bare licence, or a contractual licence. Use outside the
scope of a licence (or otherwise permitted by law) will amount to a
breach of copyright.

## Analysis of FOSS under United Kingdom law

In essence, a licence is a permission to do something which would
otherwise be unlawful; namely in the present instance, to copy. Such
permission is rarely given without qualification: conditions are almost
always attached. This is particularly the case in FOSS Licences, which
may have attached to them conditions requiring software freedom, though
the precise conditions vary from one type of FOSS Licence to the next.

Under English Law, proprietary licences are almost exclusively
contractual. Thus the licensor, as one contracting party undertakes to
authorise the licensee to undertake a number of acts which would
otherwise be unlawful under copyright law, in exchange for which the
licensee makes several contractual promises, such as a promise to pay a
licence fee or a promise not to use the software for certain purposes
(for domestic purposes only, for example, if the software is licensed on
a “home and student” basis).

In contrast, there exists in English Law the concept of a “bare licence”
which is a mere permission to do what would otherwise be unlawful, and
which may be subject to conditions (or other constraints, such as to
duration). If the conditions are fulfilled, the licensee is granted the
authorisations required under the Copyright Act, and his use is not
unlawful. If the licensee performs acts reserved to the licensor outside
the scope of the conditions, those acts will be copyright infringement.
There are no obligations on the licensee under a bare licence: an act of
the licensee either infringes copyright (because it falls outside the
scope of the licence or the licensee has not fulfilled the conditions)
or it does not. The licensor of a bare licence is not contractually
obliged to maintain the licence, and may therefore withdraw the licence
on notice to the licensee. However, by analogy with real property law,
it is arguable under English Law that once a licensee has relied on the
grant of a bare licence to his detriment, the licensee can invoke the
principle of promissory estoppel[^uk_46] to restrain the licensor from
withdrawing the licence.

Free and open source software licences are generally characterised under
English Law as bare licences. This has consequences which are considered
below.

A Scots law analysis may, however, be somewhat different. It is a
feature of bare licences under English Law that the licensee will have
given no consideration for the grant of the Licence. Since, under
English Law, for there to be a contract there requires to be
consideration, that would give obvious problems in relation to analysing
such licences in contractual terms, necessitating the development of the
concept of a bare licence. By contrast, under Scots Law, there is no
requirement for consideration for there to be a contract and this
enables a rather more straightforward analysis.

A licence is essentially a surrender by the copyright owner of his right
to prevent copying, but it is only a conditional surrender. If the
conditions are not observed by the licensee, then the permission does
not apply and the copying is unlawful. A Scots Law analysis would regard
all licences as being, in one sense, contractual (since it makes no
difference whether there is a consideration or not), but given that the
effect of the contract is a conditional surrender of the proprietor’s
rights, this may have important consequences, as more particularly
discussed below.

There may, however, be an analogous problem to at least one of the
problems presented in English Law by bare licences: where no duration is
stated for the contract, the court might find the contract unenforceable
due to lack of consensus on a material term (the duration). However,
since the court will always seek to avoid such a result where possible,
it is more likely that it would seek to construe the contact so as to
find an implied term as to duration. Just what term the court would find
would depend on the individual circumstances of each licence and may
require evidence as to the surrounding facts and circumstances of the
making of that licence as between the parties, or it might hear evidence
as to what is the normal industry practice, or, it might, as with an
English bare licence, treat the contract as being determinable by the
will of the proprietor. However, the Court would, at the least, imply a
term permitting termination on reasonable notice. In the case of FOSS
licences the Court may be reluctant to imply a term that the contract is
terminable at will (on whatever notice), as explained below.

### Copyrights

Although FOSS can be written by one person or be owned by one legal
entity (as a result of contributor assignments, for example), generally
speaking, after some time software developed along FOSS principles will
become the work of several authors, who are copyright holders, each of
whom can make claims to it.

Where the contributions are severable (and the development process of
the software may be able to assist with determining this, by examining
the history of the code’s development in the repository) then the
portions will be owned separately. If, however, the contributions of the
authors are not severable (for example where two coders are working on
the same piece of code simultaneously, for example through the
development methodology called “extreme coding”), then they will be
joint owners of the code.

Joint ownership has an effect on copyright term: the basis date for
calculating copyright term will be the last of the joint owners to die.
The consent of all joint owners is required to license the code (which
means that any individual joint owner wishing to use the code must
obtain a license from all other joint owners, and any one joint owner
may be subject to copyright infringement proceedings from the other
joint owners). The only way this form of joint ownership may arise is
through co-creation.

A second type of joint ownership may arise in England through the
formation of a trust. In this case the two types of joint ownership are
regarded under English Law as tenancy in common and joint tenancy. These
forms of ownership do not depend on co-creation, and may be created by
agreement, or assignment of copyright to joint owners in one of these
forms. In brief, tenants in common can agree that they own certain
proportion of the rights (e.g. 40/60). Joint tenants cannot, and it is
not correct to describe them as owners of a share of the copyright in
any meaningful sense. In both cases, the consent of all co-owners will
be required for exploitation, as with the non-trust form of joint
ownership. The details of trust law are beyond the scope of this
chapter.

The position in Scotland, though having a broad similarity is quite
different in important details. Joint ownership in Scotland takes the
form of either common property or joint property. Common property is
where property is owned by the parties in separate *pro indiviso* shares
in the whole in such proportions as they may have agreed (for example,
50-50 or 60-40). Each share is legally, though not physically separate,
and each proprietor may burden or alienate his own share (whether by,
for example, assignation or testamentary bequest). In Joint property,
there is a single indivisible ownership of the whole, and such burdening
or alienation by one of the proprietors is not possible. Under modern
conditions, common property is the norm and Joint property is restricted
to ownership by a body of trustees[^uk_47] or the members of an
unincorporated association.

Of course, an assignation of a (say) one third *pro indiviso* share in
the copyright of a program is not likely to be regarded in the market
place as a particularly marketable commodity, so the practical outcome
is as it is in England, namely, that for commercial exploitation, the
consent of all the common owners is likely to be necessary, though the
necessity is largely practical. In the case of Joint Property, properly
so called, however, the necessity will also be legal.

As a general rule, since joint owners are only ever able to exploit the
copyright with the agreement of the other joint owners, it is wise to
document the rights that each joint owner has in a formal licence
agreement, granting a licence from the joint owners to each joint owner
individually. In this way, a general right to grant sub-licences, to
exploit, create adaptations and so-on may be explicitly granted. If the
co-owners intend that the software is released under an open source
licence, then that licence itself may grant sufficient rights to each
co-owner individually.

Under English and Scots law, it is not clear what happens to the
copyright ownership of code which contains severable contributions in
source code, which are then more closely intertwined in the object code.
However it is submitted that not a great deal turns on this in practice.

In practice, and given the immensely long period of copyright subsisting
in computer software, for code released under an open source licence,
there are few practical differences between the different forms of
co-ownership in open source.

By contributing to a pre-existing work by creating new modules or
modifying or amending it, subsequent authors are creating a derivative
work[^uk_48] of the underlying work, and therefore, the licence of the
original author will be required both to amend it and to subsequently
exploit it (open source licences will grant these rights).

Any co-owner will have standing to take proceedings against infringers,
whether third parties, or another co-owner who is infringing.

It is not clear under English and Scots law how damages would be
assessed for infringement of FOSS, including where the damages relate to
a claim brought by one co-owner.

### The assignment of copyrights

In order to control the copyright situation better (to facilitate
re-licensing, for example), it may be useful to collect all copyrights
concerning a FOSS project within one organisation. The existence of this
organisation will simplify the management and enforcing of the joint
rights. The collective management of copyrights is perfectly possible
under English and Scots law, and is usually, but not necessarily,
facilitated by an assignment or assignation of the copyrights. As we
have seen above, copyrights can be assigned at law only in writing, in a
document signed by the assignor.

### Moral rights

FOSS originated in the United States, and therefore attaches less
importance to the moral rights of the author. The Open Source Definition
specifies that the author of software distributed under a FOSS license
cannot oppose the use of the software by certain people and groups[^uk_49]
or for certain areas of application[^uk_50].

Computer programs *per se* do not attract moral rights[^uk_51]. However,
related materials, to the extent that they are still literary works, may
attract protection by way of moral rights (if they are created by
independent contractors or other individuals who are not employees).
Most obviously, this may include operation manuals.

Moral rights in the UK are less absolute than in many other European
jurisdictions. All moral rights are potentially capable of waiver by the
content creator (both before and after creation of any specific work),
and copyright assignments and employment contracts frequently contain
general waivers.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses

In one sense, it is meaningless to talk about FOSS licences being
“enforceable”.

Under English law, FOSS licences are best understood as bare licences,
and as such may provide a defence to a claim of copyright infringement,
but, under English Law, no one is able to commence a claim under the
FOSS licence itself. However this point has not been judicially
determined in the United Kingdom[^uk_52].

Under Scots Law, however, there is no obvious impediment to the owner of
the copyright seeking to bring proceedings against a licensee for breach
of the conditions under which the licence was granted. That action might
seek either the statutory remedies available for copyright infringement
(the conditions having been breached, the act of copying is no longer
permitted) or it might seek the contractual remedies stipulated in the
licence, since all licences (including what in English Law would be
regarded as a mere “bare licence”) are, equally, contractual. Further,
because of the nature of the obligations of the Licensee as conditions
attached to the grant of the permission, the right to enforce those
conditions will go with the ownership of the copyright. It follows
therefore that the copyright may be assigned to another without the need
for a separate assignation of the supposed “right” to enforce the
copyright.[^uk_53]

Another way of looking at the issue (and, it may be, from the English
Law perspective) a better question is whether a FOSS licence can provide
an effective defence against a claim of infringement. This point has
also not been judicially determined in the United Kingdom, but it is
difficult to construct an argument as to why such a licence would not
act as an effective defence, except possibly that, as a bare licence
granted under English Law, it may be withdrawn on notice by the
copyright owner. However, the doctrine of promissory estoppel (discussed
above) provides a mechanism to restrict this right of withdrawal where
the licensee has relied on the licence.

Although a Scottish Court could similarly rely on the analogous concept
of Personal Bar to restrict the exercise of the right of a proprietor to
withdraw the Licence where that has been relied upon to his detriment by
a Licensee, it is more likely that the Scottish Court would effectively
deal with the matter at the stage of determining whether the copyright
proprietor’s permission can indeed be withdrawn at will. As explained
above, the Court would set itself the task of seeing whether the
contract (for such is even what English Law regards as a bare licence)
contains an implied term as to duration. In the case of FOSS licences,
it would consider the architecture and structure of the licences
(particularly their cascade nature, the accretion of rights as the
program is developed, and the automatic downstream licensing provisions)
and, it is submitted, have little difficulty in coming to the view that
there is an implied term that the license duration is perpetual, and
that the licence cannot be terminated by the proprietor at will.

#### Parties to the licences

If one author makes his work available under a FOSS license, the answer
is clear: the licence is granted by the author to the licensee. In case
of different co-authors, it becomes more complicated. If the licensors
are co-owners of severable parts of the work, then there will be a
sequence of licences in place between those co-owners and the licensee.

In most cases FOSS will be the work of several authors who did not work
in joint consultation. FOSS is usually realised via a tree of authors
who all contributed to the version of the program. In so far as a new
author makes an original contribution to the work, a derivative work is
produced. The licensee of the eventual work will need to have the
consent of every author in the chain who made an original contribution
to the eventual work, starting with the author of the first work. This
consent can be by a direct licence (as with the GPL, where the licensee
is expressed to receive a direct licence from all previous licensors of
the work), or indirectly by giving consent in the FOSS license to the
next author to modify and distribute the work (essentially a
sub-licence).

Several FOSS licenses solve this by explicitly confirming that the
licensee will receive a licence from all prior authors in the tree. GPL
version 3, for instance, contains the following clause: “Each time you
convey a covered work, the recipient automatically receives a license
from the original licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work,
subject to this License[^uk_54]

#### Validity of the FOSS licence as a contract

An author chooses a FOSS license because he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others — possibly with certain restrictions.
For him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions.

Conventional commercial licence agreements are reached by the explicit
acceptance of the terms and conditions by the licensee following the
signing of the terms and conditions, by opening the packaging, by
clicking or selecting an “I agree” button or by any other action from
which acceptance can be inferred. These methods to reach a licensing
agreement have been sufficiently tried and tested and, at least between
commercial parties, are generally considered to be valid.

Many FOSS licences are drafted in such a way that there is no obligation
on the licensee: merely a set of conditions with which the licensee must
comply in order to benefit from the protection of the licence. English
law requires that for an contract to be validly formed, there must be an
intention to create legal relations, an offer and an acceptance of that
offer, and mutuality of obligations on both parties. If the licensee is
operating within the scope of the conditions, then he obtains the
protection of the licence. If he is operating outside their scope, then
he is potentially liable to a copyright infringement claim. There is no
obligation for him to act in accordance with the condition: but
consequences are likely to flow if he fails to do so.

Where it is ambiguous whether a term could be interpreted as a condition
or an obligation, then it is argued, that by analogy with the principle
that where contract terms are to be implied, they should be implied to
the minimum extent possible to give business efficacy to the agreement,
that a contract itself should not be implied unless such an implication
is necessary to give business efficacy to the relationship. In many
cases, it will not be necessary.

It is an open question as to whether the approach adopted by the
Scottish Courts might differ. As noted above, Scots Law does not require
consideration for there to be a contract. If the copyright owner
undertakes to grant a licence on certain conditions and a licensee then,
in effect, avails himself of the permission, it is at least arguable
that his so availing himself of the permission amounts to an acceptance
of the offer which falls to be inferred *rebus et factis* and there is
thus a contract which does create obligations upon the licensee.

In any event, FOSS licenses which are concluded in accordance with the
contractual mechanism and comply with the characteristics required by
English Law (or which, in Scots Law terms discloses that a contractual
consensus has been reached) will have been validly formed and
enforceable as contracts. However, from the English perspective, owing
to the lack of mutuality of obligations, it is arguable that many of
them will be regarded by an English court as bare licences as opposed to
contracts. As explained, this is unlikely to become an issue if the
licence falls to be interpreted under Scots Law.

Typically, in a FOSS environment, however, software is made available
with the simple specification on a website or in the source code of the
software that it concerns FOSS. The license usually does not need to be
explicitly accepted. Having to click and confirm every time could in
some cases interfere with the use of the software. The Open Source
Definition opposes demanding explicit agreement with the licence
conditions with the aim of confirming the agreement between licensor and
licensee[^uk_55].

The question is whether in these cases a valid licence is granted. In
other words, as we have seen before, is a user of the software under a
FOSS licence within the scope of its terms able to defend a claim of
copyright infringement from the licensor? Using the software without the
author’s consent implies a copyright infringement. There is no reason to
believe that the FOSS licence does not grant effective consent
(although, as stated above, this is subject to a possible right of
withdrawal on notice). Since there is no implication (that cannot be
rebutted by the application of an explicit licence) that software made
available on the internet has been dedicated to the public domain (to
the extent that such dedication is at all possible), or is made
available under some sort of liberal implied licence, this has the
consequence that everyone who wants to use software which they find via
the internet, needs actively to look for a licence.

Since the FOSS licence is the only means by which authorisation to use
the software is granted, and failing that authorisation, the use will
almost invariably be a breach of copyright, there is little value in a
user trying to dispute the existence or validity of the licence under
either English or Scots Law.

#### Violation of licence terms

Where a user is using software subject to copyright other than in
accordance with the conditions contained in a licence, then that use
will (unless a statutory exception applies) be in breach of copyright,
and the user will be liable to a copyright claim from the copyright
owner. This is equally true if the licence is contractual. However, in
this latter case, the licensee may also be open to a claim for breach of
contract. This distinction may also affect the interpretation of the
terms of the licence, as it becomes open to the court to interpret
contract terms as conditions or warranties. If the term is a condition,
then use of the software outside its scope is both a breach of contract,
and also a breach of copyright. If the term is a warranty, then the use
of the software will not be a violation of copyright, but breach of the
warranty will open the licensee to a contractual claim.

There are several other consequences of a FOSS licence being determined
to be a contract.

A contract is amenable to specific performance: an equitable remedy,
granted at the court’s discretion, under which a party to a contract is
compelled to perform it (as opposed to paying damages for his failure to
perform). This may apply to obligations to release source code.

In addition, under English Law, as a contract, the Contracts (Rights of
Third Parties) Act 1999 will apply (in default of its explicit
exclusion). If, for example, a FOSS licence provides that the licensee
must provide all third parties with copies of source code on request,
then any third party (i.e. anyone in the world) would, under that Act,
be entitled to apply to the court for an order to enforce that
obligation as against the licensor. Similarly, under Scots Law, the
third party would probably be able to rely upon a *ius quaesitum
tertio*.

Further, under insolvency legislation, insolvency practitioners
administering the affairs of an insolvent individual or company are
granted certain powers to terminate unprofitable or onerous contracts,
which may include FOSS licences granted under contract[^uk_56]. Similar
provisions apply in Scotland.

### Waiver and liability

There is, under English and Scots Law, no automatic connection between
the ownership of copyright, and liability arising from a defect in that
copyright work. Liability for a defect in that work will arise either
because of an explicit or implied contract term in a contract between
the the provider of the software (who may or may not be its owner, and
therefore the licensor) and the user. Contract terms implied by the Sale
of Goods Act 1979 (which are unlikely to apply directly to software *per
se*, but may apply to a physical good which incorporates software)
include a warranty that the item is fit for purpose and of satisfactory
quality. In a contract for the supply of services (made in the course of
a business), the term implied is that the service provider applied
reasonable care and skill in the supply of the services (Supply of Goods
and Services Act 1982). In most cases, there will be no such contract
between the supplier and the end-user where FOSS is involved, and, even
if there is, it may well be the case that such a contract is not in the
course of business.

It is theoretically possible that an author could be liable to a
licensee in tort including negligence[^uk_57]. However, it is generally
difficult in English and Scots law for a person to claim for
non-physical (i.e. pure economic) loss unless there is some sort of
connection between the two parties where it is reasonable for one party
to rely on the other’s knowledge and expertise.[^uk_58]

Typically, FOSS licenses contain strong exclusion clauses, which attempt
to discharge the author from all liability[^uk_59]. One reason for this is
that FOSS is often made available without a fee, as a result of which
the author generates insufficient income to pay for liability insurances
and legal costs[^uk_60]. Another is a simple principle of fairness in that
programmer should not be asked to accept liability for something when
she has no control over the distribution of it.

Although this reasoning is certainly valid for the amateur programmer,
it applies much less for professional programmers who built their
business model around FOSS[^uk_61]. Professional suppliers of FOSS or
related services often provide warranties and indemnities[^uk_62]. There is
no reason, in principle, why a person may not warrant the performance of
another person’s software (or indeed its title). However, care should be
taken to ensure that such a business does not become an unlawful
insurance business.

The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 is the primary piece of legislation
governing exclusion clauses. Some exclusion clauses (such as those
limiting liability for death and/or personal injury caused by the
negligence of the person seeking to rely on them) are not capable of
exclusion under the Act (irrespective of whether or not they are
contained in a contract, although the title of the Act might suggest
otherwise). Further, outside the context of a contract, clauses which
seek to exclude liability for negligence are enforceable only to the
extent that they are reasonable. The question as to whether a notice is
reasonable or not, is ultimately a question of fact for the judge.
Bearing in mind, first, the reluctance of judges to find liability for
purely economic losses in non-contractual negligence cases, and, second,
that the software is licensed for free, it would seem unlikely that
under English or Scots law the author of FOSS would find himself liable
in negligence for mere non-performance of the software. However, where
the software was specifically provided for use where its failure might
cause death or personal injury, the exclusions of liability contained in
the licence would not apply.

Perhaps anomalously, if the FOSS licence is found to be a contract[^uk_63],
the Unfair Contract Terms Act applies somewhat differently. The rule
about inability to exclude liability for death and personal injury
arising from negligence remains, but the reasonableness test in respect
of other terms only applies where the licensee deals as a consumer or on
the licensor’s written standard terms of business. Taking the latter
point first: it would initially seem that a FOSS licence would count as
written standard terms. First, where the licensor is not acting in the
course of a business, then the terms may be written and standard, but
they will not be terms of business. Even if the licensor is licensing
the software in the course of his business, it may be that the licence
is not his standard terms: it has been argued, in the context of
building contracts, that where the terms are not imposed by the
contractor, but are standard terms drafted by a third party (for
example, the Royal Institute of British Architects) that they are not
the other’s written standard terms of business. This argument may well
be applicable to FOSS licences which are drafted by a third party (for
example, the various flavours of GPL). If this argument is successful,
the exclusion will be applicable if either the licensee or the licensor
is not operating as a consumer (that is, operating within the scope of a
business). The upshot of this is that even if a FOSS licence is found to
be a contract, in many of the contexts in which FOSS is employed, the
Unfair Contract Terms Act will not impinge on typical exclusion clauses
(at least to the extent that they exclude liability for loss not
relating to death or personal injury), and even if it does, then the
judge will consider whether the exclusion is reasonable, for which the
fact that there may well be no direct relationship between the licensor
and licensee, and that the software is being licensed at no cost, will
all be relevant factors.

If the FOSS licence can be construed as a contract, and the transaction
is made with a consumer, then the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts
1999 will apply. Further analysis is not appropriate given the space
available in this chapter, but consideration of exclusions of liability
is likely to be similar to consideration under the Unfair Contract Terms
Act 1977.

The Consumer Protection Act 1987 (“CPA”) implements the directive
85/374/EEC. UK Government guidance suggests that software is a product
for the purposes of the Act, and that the producer of software may find
himself strictly liable where software finds itself into the supply
chain of a dangerous product[^uk_64]. However, the CPA does provide a
defence to a provider of a dangerous component where that component was
supplied free and not with a view to a profit.[^uk_65]

### The copyleft principle

#### Principle

A characteristic found in different (but not all[^uk_66]) FOSS licenses is
the so-called “copyleft” principle. FOSS licenses which incorporate the
copyleft principle[^uk_67], lay down the principle that everyone in the
chain of consecutive users, as a condition of the grant of the right of
use of the software, needs to distribute the improvements he makes to
the software and the derivative[^uk_68] works he makes under the same
conditions to other users, if he chooses to distribute such improvements
or derivative works. In other words, software which incorporates
copyleft FOSS, needs to be distributed in turn as copyleft FOSS.

The copyleft principle is restrictive. Businesses which rely on licence
revenue as an income stream will find that they cannot incorporate third
party code released under a copyleft licence into their proprietary
offering. It is also restrictive, in that with few exceptions[^uk_69], it
is not possible to combine software under two different copyleft
licences and then distribute them. The reason for this is that both
copyleft licences will insist on the resulting software being released
under their own terms to the exclusion of any other.

Sometimes warnings are issued for the dangers that companies run if a
negligent or vindictive employee were to incorporate a piece of copyleft
code in the code of proprietary software. In theory this could mean that
the company would be obliged to make its proprietary software available
under a copyleft FOSS license. Under English law, the court’s powers to
compel the release of the source code would be contained in the
equitable order of specific performance. Only if the relevant FOSS
licence amounted to a contract would this remedy be effective, and even
then, the remedy would be at the discretion of the court.

Under Scots Law, the risk for the infringing company would be higher. In
the first place, there is a greater likelihood that a FOSS licence would
be regarded as contractual, and, second, the Scottish remedy of specific
implement will generally be granted, the court’s discretion to refuse it
being limited to cases where to grant the remedy would give rise to
exceptional hardship, where the obligation is for the payment of money,
where the contract, if specific implement were granted would result in
the creation of an intimate relationship[^uk_70], where compliance would be
impossible[^uk_71] and where the court cannot enforce the decree[^uk_72]. In
those cases where specific performance or specific implement was not
granted, it is likely that there would be the grant of an injunction,
or, in Scotland, an interdict to prevent distribution of the infringing
code, coupled with a damages claim. The infringing company, if it were
not prepared to comply with the terms of the FOSS licence, would
therefore have to release its software without the infringing FOSS code,
either at a cost of impaired functionality, or alternatively by
obtaining or writing code with similar functionality from elsewhere.

### Damages

Damage caused by copyright violations are compensated for under English
and Scots law by the applying one of two measures of damages, as
selected by the copyright owner. These are either an account of profits
(in Scotland, an action of accounting for profits) or damages
representing the loss in value to the copyright owner of the underlying
work.

The difficulty with seeking an account of profits or accounting for
profits can be in determining what proportion of the profits of any
infringing sale are capable of allocation to the specific piece of
copyright owned by the claimant. However, where an infringer takes a
piece of software (FOSS or otherwise) where the claimant is the owner,
and sells it a profit in violation of the owner’s rights, the claimant
is entitled to the profits so derived.

So far as diminution of value of the underlying work is concerned, it
can be difficult for a court to determine that there is a loss in
economic value, especially where the work in question is made available
free of charge. This is where dual licensing can assist the claimant: if
the software is also made available under a proprietary licence for
which a fee is charged, then the court may be persuaded that this is the
appropriate fee on which to base damages for infringement[^uk_73].

Statutory damages such as dual or triple damages are not available under
English or Scots law. However, under English law, punitive and exemplary
damages may be awarded in extreme cases, but such awards are rare. Under
Scots Law there is no concept of punitive or exemplary damages and under
no circumstances are damages anything other than compensatory. The
general rule in litigation in England is that “costs follow the event”
and in Scotland that expenses follow success: in other words, the party
which prevails is likely to be awarded its costs (in Scotland, its
expenses). However, costs or expenses are at the discretion of the
judge, who may, nonetheless award costs or expenses against a prevailing
party for many reasons, including poor conduct of the case, the
prevailing party winning on a technicality in a case which should never
have been brought, and so on. Even where a party is awarded costs or
expenses, recovery is rarely 100% of the costs expended, as costs and
expenses are limited to what is known as “judicial expenses”, which is
to say only such expenses as it is considered proper to be recovered
against an unsuccessful party, and only in a sum which is considered
reasonable. This is established in a process called “taxation”. In
England, costs are typically reduced to around 60% of the costs actually
expended. In Scotland, the amount of the reduction in expenses is more
difficult to predict, but there will almost always be a reduction which
can be substantial.

## FOSS cases in the United Kingdom

There have not yet been any reported cases (June 2014).

## Legal procedures

Stephen Mason kindly reviewed this section from a litigator’s
perspective.

### England

FOSS-related cases in England will typically be copyright infringement
cases, and will be heard in the civil courts. Simple cases may be heard
in the county court, but cases with special legal significance, or of
higher worth, will be heard in the High Court. Cases are decided by a
single judge: jury trials are extremely rare in civil cases in England.

A case will typically commence with the claimant’s lawyer sending a
letter before action setting out the claim. Many types of claim in
England will render the claimant at risk of costs if a strict pre-action
protocol (or default practice direction) is not followed. There is
currently no pre-action protocol for intellectual property cases so the
default rules apply. A claimant will always be at risk of a costs claim
unless care is taken to give the defendant an opportunity to settle the
case. The English courts regard themselves as the dispute resolution
mechanism of last resort, and failure a party to show evidence of
adequate attempts to resolve the dispute by alternative means may render
it liable to costs.

A claimant may apply for an injunction to restrain infringement of
intellectual property rights, and there is no reason why this should not
in theory apply to an infringement of a FOSS licence. However,
injunctions are not granted as of right, and are always at the
discretion of the judge. In an emergency, an injunction may be claimed
ex parte meaning that the claimant applies without giving notice to the
defendant. The courts are reluctant to grant such an extreme remedy, and
will require the claimant to demonstrate the necessity of such a remedy,
as well as giving an undertaking to bring the matter to trial, and pay
the defendant’s costs if the injunction proves to be unfounded. An
interim injunction may be granted on notice, where the defendant is
given an opportunity to set out its case prior to a full trial.

As well as demonstrating clean hands (that the claimant has not itself
committed some wrongdoing), the claimant will have to establish that
damages are an inadequate remedy (in FOSS cases, where a licence fee is
not paid for use of the software, the claimant could put this argument
particularly strongly, saying that its intention in making the software
available was never to make money, but to require those redistributing
derivative works of it (in the case of copyleft software) to make those
derivative works available under a similar licence. The court will also
apply a balance of convenience test to determine whether the grant of an
injunction pending the trial will, on balance, benefit the claimant more
that it harms the defendant[^uk_74].

A useful additional remedy is the forfeiture of infringing articles.
Furthermore, if, there is perceived to be a risk that evidence may be
destroyed (for example hard discs scrubbed) then a useful weapon is,
again on an *ex parte* application, the granting of a search order for
the seizure and securing of evidence[^uk_75]. The English civil law system
is adversarial as opposed to inquisitorial, and the judge decides on the
basis of the arguments put by the parties' lawyers (usually, in court
cases, barristers). However, the English High Court possesses a division
called the Technology and Construction Court where the Judges are
somewhat more experienced in technology matters than other divisions of
the High Court, and are accordingly more likely to take it on themselves
to take on a minor inquisitorial role. It is by no means automatic that
a FOSS case will be heard by the Technology and Construction Court, and
in fact, this division is better regarded as being the appropriate one
for handling projects-type cases with multiple parties, rather than
two-party intellectual property claims.

We have seen already that the English litigation system operates a
costs-follow-the-event mechanism, but that costs are in the gift of the
judge who decides on the basis of the conduct of the parties, and are
subject to the process assessment called taxation.

Aggrieved parties are able to appeal from the High Court to the Court of
Appeal, in cases where the Judge has erred on a matter of law, and from
there there is a right of appeal on a question of law to the Supreme
Court (formerly the House of Lords), although leave has to be granted
either by the Court of Appeal or, on an application, by the Supreme
Court itself. In cases involving questions of EU Law it is open for the
High Court or the Court of Appeal to refer the question to the European
Court of Justice, though such a reference is not mandatory. However, a
reference from the Supreme Court in such a case would be mandatory.

### Scotland

Cases in Scotland relating to FOSS may be likely to be seeking either
remedies for copyright infringement or remedies available under the
Licence. Such cases do not involve any question of criminal law, and
will be brought in the civil courts. Under the Scottish Court structure,
the country is divided into a number of Sheriffdoms and each Sheriffdom
will, typically, have a number of courts within it — one in every large
town and some, indeed, even in very small communities in remoter parts
of the country. The Sheriff has both a civil and a criminal jurisdiction
but, of course, a licensing dispute will be heard by him under the civil
Ordinary Cause rules. There is no upper financial limit on the cases
which can be heard in the Sheriff Court, nor is there any filter to
reserve more difficult cases to higher courts. In the result, in the
areas with which this Chapter is concerned, the Sheriff Court’s
Jurisdiction is, effectively, co-existensive with that of the Court of
Session.

The Court of Session is the supreme civil Court in Scotland[^uk_76] and is
divided into the Outer House (the equivalent of the High Court in
England) which hears cases at first instance, and the Inner House (the
equivalent of the Court of Appeal in England) which hears Appeals from
both the Outer House and the Sheriff Court. The standard form of
litigation in the Outer House is by way of an Ordinary Action[^uk_77]
though there is also available a special Intellectual Property Action
procedure and a special Commercial Action procedure. Because a case
concerns intellectual property and might competently be heard under the
intellectual property procedure, does not compel it to be so heard. The
pursuer might opt to raise the action as an ordinary action, or, if the
case is commercial in nature, might (but is not compelled to) raise it
as a commercial action.

There are both Intellectual Property Judges and Commercial judges, but
neither of these types of specialist judges are allocated only cases in
the areas in which they specialise. There is a heavy demand on judicial
time in Scotland, and all of the Senators of the College of Justice[^uk_78]
are liable to find themselves doing anything. Thus, intellectual
property judges can find themselves hearing, say, road accident or
medical negligence cases, or divorces, or cases about the more arcane
areas of wills and succession or revenue law. Because of the collegiate
nature of the Court of Session, an intellectual property judge might
find himself in an emergency called upon to sit in the Inner House.
Further, although the High Court of Justiciary (the supreme criminal
Court in Scotland) is an entirely separate court with its own history
and procedures, and its own judges (Lords of Justiciary) the judges of
the High Court of Justiciary are the same people as the judges of the
Court of Session, only wearing different robes and occupying a different
office. Accordingly, the Intellectual Property judges are quite likely
to find that they spend some of their time hearing criminal trials in
Glasgow High Court. A similar position potentially arises in the case of
Commercial judges, but there is an expectation that they will be largely
relieved of duties other than sitting as a commercial judge. There is no
such expectation in the case of Intellectual Property judges. As a
result, it may happen that an intellectual property judge will not be
available to hear an intellectual property case, but the rules allow any
other judge to hear intellectual property cases.

In addition, a few, but by no means all Sheriff Courts also have a
commercial action procedure modelled on the commercial procedure in the
Court of Session.

Therefore, a pursuer who is contemplating raising an action relating to
FOSS may competently be able to do so as a Sheriff Court Ordinary
action, a Sheriff Court Commercial action, a Court of Session Ordinary
action, a Court of Session Commercial action, or a Court of Session
Intellectual Property action.

Commercial actions and Intellectual Property actions are subject to more
proactive case management by the Court than are Ordinary actions and
every effort is made to ensure that one judge is allocated to deal with
the whole of the case (with Ordinary actions, cases are dealt with by
whichever judge happens to be free at the time). Commercial actions are
subject to a strict pre-action protocol involving the need for
solicitors to send letters before action and to discuss the dispute and,
if nothing else, at least narrow the issues. Theoretically, failure to
go through the pre-action protocol may result in a penalty in expenses,
though this does not always occur. It is also theoretically possible for
the court to dismiss the action for failure to give effect to the
pre-action protocol, but this seldom happens. There is no mandatory
pre-action protocol in either Intellectual Property actions or Ordinary
actions. Unlike England, the Scottish Courts do not tend to see
themselves as the dispute resolution mechanism of last resort, and
(certainly in Intellectual Property and Ordinary actions) there is no
compulsitor for a party to attempt to resolve the dispute by alternative
means.

Civil jury trials do not exist in the Sheriff Court and, in the Court of
Session, are available only for reparation and defamation cases.
Accordingly, any dispute relating to FOSS will be heard by a judge
sitting alone, though, in the case of the Intellectual Property
procedure, there is the possibility of the judge sitting with an expert
assessor.

A pursuer may apply for an interdict to restrain a wrong, for example
the infringement of intellectual property rights or of contractual
rights. If he can demonstrate that there is sufficient urgency he can
obtain an *interim* interdict before service of the Summons (i.e.
without notifying the defender in advance, unless the defender has
lodged a *caveat*); but, of course, he has no automatic entitlement to
the grant of an *interim* interdict — he has to demonstrate that one is
required on the balance of convenience. Even if an interim interdict is
obtained, the defender might always enrol a motion for a recall of the
interdict, and the court will then hear both sides on what is usually a
fuller argument. Just where the balance of convenience lies is very much
a matter for the judge in the whole circumstances of the case.

These remedies will apply in a FOSS case as they would in any other
case.

A useful additional remedy available in Scotland as it is in England, is
the forfeiture of infringing articles. Furthermore, if, there is
perceived to be a risk that evidence may be destroyed (for example hard
disks scrubbed) then a useful weapon is, again on an *ex parte*
application before service of the Summons, the appointment by the Court
of a Commissioner (usually a Senior Counsel) to conduct a “dawn raid” to
seize and secure evidence.

The Scottish civil law system shares with the English system the
characteristic of being adversarial as opposed to inquisitorial, and the
judge decides the case on the basis of the arguments put by the parties'
lawyers. If the case is being conducted in the Court of Session, this
will usually be an Advocate[^uk_79] though may also be a
Solicitor-Advocate[^uk_80] and if the case is being conducted in the
Sheriff Court, may be an Advocate but is rather more likely to be a
Solicitor.

As noted above, expenses (which, however are subject to taxation) will
usually follow success, though this may not always be the outcome,
depending on the view which the judge may take of perceived special
factors.

Aggrieved parties may appeal from the Sheriff to the Sheriff Principal
of the Sheriffdom in which the case was heard, and from the Sheriff
Principal to the Inner House of the Court of Session. The Appeal to the
Sheriff Principal is optional, and an aggrieved party can elect to
appeal instead from the Sheriff direct to the Inner House. If the case
was heard in the Outer House of the Court of Session, then the Appeal
lies to the Inner House. From there, there is a right of appeal to the
Supreme Court (formerly the House of Lords). The right of appeal is
absolute and no leave is required either from the Inner House or the
Supreme Court, though the Appellant does require to obtain a certificate
signed by two counsel certifying that there are stateable grounds of
Appeal. In cases involving questions of EU Law it is open for the
Sheriff Court or the Outer or Inner Houses of the Court of Session to
refer the question to the European Court of Justice, though such a
reference is not mandatory. However, a reference from the Supreme Court
in such a case would be mandatory.

### Recommended literature

-   Law and the Internet Third edition, ed. Edwards and Waelde, Hart
    Publishing Oxford 2009, esp. Chapter 11, Andres Guadamuz

-   A Manager’s Guide to IT Law, second edition, British Computer
    Society, 2011

-   Stephen Mason, general editor, Electronic Evidence (3rd edition,
    LexisNexis Butterworths, 2012)

[^uk_bio1]: *Andrew Katz (b. 1966) is a partner at Moorcrofts LLP, a boutique law firm based in
the Thames Valley, England. He became a barrister in 1990 and in 1993
requalified (and now practises as) a solicitor. Prior to his legal
career, Andrew was a programmer. He is a founder editor of the
International Free and Open Source Software Law Review. He is a visiting
lecturer at Queen Mary College, University of London, and sits on the
legal advisory panel of the Open Rights Group, and the UK panel for the
Free Software Foundation Europe. 
<http://www.moorcrofts.com>*

[^uk_bio2]: *Iain G. Mitchell QC is in private practice as an Advocate (Barrister) in Scotland. He is the
Chairman of the Scottish Society for Computers & Law, Chairman of the
Faculty of Advocates Information Technology Group, Co-convenor of the
Scottish Lawyers European Group, and a Liveryman of the Worshipful
Company of Information Technologists. He holds office as the United
Kingdom representative on the Information Technology committee of the
CCBE and is a member of the IT Panel of the Bar Council of England &
Wales and of the Scottish Courts Technology Forum. He is a member of the
editorial committee of the International Free and Open Source Software
Law Review and was editor of the former e-law review. He is recommended
in the Legal 500 for IT Law and is rated in Band 1 for both IT Law and
Public Procurement Law in the Chambers Directory.*

[^uk_1]: The continued existence of Scots law as a separate system was
    guaranteed by the Act of Union of 1707, which united the previously
    separate nations of Scotland and of England. The historical roots of
    Scots law lie in an admixture of a Roman-Dutch system (generations
    of mediaeval Scottish law students studied at Leyden University)
    with a substantial common law overlay. As a result, in some areas,
    the laws of Scotland and of England can be substantially different.
    By contrast the laws of England and of Northern Ireland share a
    common heritage, and are substantially similar, though some minor
    differences can occur.

[^uk_2]: The United Kingdom consists of England, Wales, Scotland and
    Northern Ireland, and three distinct legal jurisdictions: England
    and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. The law in effect in
    England and Wales is called “English law” throughout England and
    Wales, never “Welsh Law” even when it applies in Wales (by analogy,
    Australians speak English, not Australian). The United Kingdom
    Parliament has devolved both executive and legislative powers in
    certain areas to the devolved parliaments (which are
    constitutionally not sovereign parliaments but statutory bodies) in
    Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Executive and legislative
    powers in respect of those matters which have not been devolved
    (which, since there is no English parliament means, in respect of
    England, everything) are exercised by the United Kingdom parliament,
    which also has powers also to legislate directly in respect even of
    devolved matters (but does not normally do so.) Much legislation
    passed by the United Kingdom parliament is expressed to cover all
    three jurisdictions of the United Kingdom, but the legislation
    itself will then take account of differences of terminology and
    procedure within the different jurisdictions. Proposals for a
    separate Welsh jurisdiction, which was the subject of consultation
    in 2012, have been shelved as of September 2013. The Isle of Man and
    the Channel Islands are neither parts of the United Kingdom nor of
    the European Union, and have their own legal systems and laws. They
    are not covered by this Chapter.

[^uk_3]: An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by vesting the Copies of
    Printed Books in the Authors or purchasers of such Copies during the
    Timed therein mentioned (8 Anne c 19)

[^uk_4]: <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1988/ukpga_19880048_en_1.htm>

[^uk_5]: 1992 SI 3233

[^uk_6]: Re-enacted as 2009/24/EC

[^uk_7]: Defined by the Copyright Act, s. 178 as “…emptygenerated by
    computer in circumstances such that there is no human author of the
    work”

[^uk_8]: Copyright Act s. 9(3)

[^uk_9]: Copyright Act s 11(2)

[^uk_10]: The courts will occasionally intervene to correct manifest
    injustice: for example, Griggs and Others v. Evans and Others (2005)
    EWCA (Civ) 11, and Destra Software Ltd v Comada (UK) LLP and others
    (2013) EWHC 1575 (Pat), 11 June 2013 but cases like this are unusual

[^uk_11]: One the one hand, it is arguable that the output of a program
    (e.g. on a screen) is a separate and independent copyright work,
    created by running the instructions contained in the program. On the
    other hand, running a program is in some sense “performing it” as is
    following the stage directions in a play. These distinctions are
    fairly academic, since in either case, the program will undoubtedly
    be copied in the act of running it.

[^uk_12]: Copyright Act, Sections 50A,B,C

[^uk_13]: Copyright Act, Section 50C(1)

[^uk_14]: Copyright Act, Section 50C(2)

[^uk_15]: Copyright Act, Section 50A

[^uk_16]: Copyright Act, Section 50BA

[^uk_17]: Copyright Act, Section 50B

[^uk_18]: Copyright Act, Sections 79 and 80

[^uk_19]: Copyright Act, Section 12 (2)

[^uk_20]: Copyright Act, Section 12

[^uk_21]: Copyright Act, Section 12 (8)

[^uk_22]: The term used in England and Northern Ireland is “Assignment” and
    the term used in Scotland is “Assignation”. The difference is
    entirely one of terminology and not of substance. The substance is
    the same in all jurisdictions, even to the extent that a Scottish
    Court would probably recognise a document operative under Scots Law
    and mislabelled as an assignment instead of an assignation, and, in
    respect of the courts of the other two jurisdictions, the converse
    would probably also hold true. The word “assignment” is the only
    word used in the Copyright Act, but the interpretation section
    (section 177) defines “assignment” so as to include assignation.

[^uk_23]: Copyright Act, Section 90(3)

[^uk_24]: It does not necessarily follow that the document requires to be
    written on paper nor that the signature cannot be an electronic one,
    but a detailed discussion of this topic lies outwith the scope of
    the present work.

[^uk_25]: Section 90(2)

[^uk_26]: Section 91

[^uk_27]: Section 90(1)

[^uk_28]: Section 296(6)

[^uk_29]: Section 296ZF

[^uk_30]: Section 296

[^uk_31]: Section 296ZA

[^uk_32]: Section 296ZA (2)

[^uk_33]: Section 296ZG

[^uk_34]: Section 296ZD

[^uk_35]: In Scotland “defender”

[^uk_36]: Section 107(1)

[^uk_37]: Section 107(1)(e)

[^uk_38]: Section 107(2)

[^uk_39]: Section 107 (2A)

[^uk_40]: R v Vickerman 2012 unreported

[^uk_41]: Section 296ZB

[^uk_42]: Sections 99, 100 and for example 296(4)

[^uk_43]: <http://customs.hmrc.gov.uk/channelsPortalWebApp/downloadFile?contentID=HMCE_CL_000244>

[^uk_44]: Scots law, following Roman law recognises the binding legal
    effect of a unilteral promise without further formality, and, in any
    event there are no such things as Deed Polls in Scots Law.

[^uk_45]: Personal bar is the equivalent principle in Scotland to estoppel
    in England.

[^uk_46]: *Central London Property Trust Ltd v High Trees House Ltd* (1947)
    KB 130

[^uk_47]: It is worth pointing out that neither joint ownership nor common
    ownership of itself creates a trust so the mere fact that property
    in one thing is held by a number of owners does not automatically
    mean that they are Trustees.

[^uk_48]: “Derivative work” has no statutory definition in UK law, and is
    used in this chapter as shorthand for “a work based on a
    pre-existing work to the extent that exploitation of the new work
    will require the licence of the owner of the pre-existing work”. An
    adaptation (as defined in Section 21) will be a derivative work
    within this definition.

[^uk_49]: OSD Clause 5.

[^uk_50]: OSD Clause 6. Bruce Perens indicates, e.g., that an author of
    FOSS cannot provide a clause that prohibits the use of the software
    by regimes such as the former South African apartheids regime (B.,
    PERENS, “The FOSS Definition”, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>).

[^uk_51]: Sections 79 and 80

[^uk_52]: For judicial discussion of this point in the United States, see
    *Jacobsen v. Katzer*
    \[<http://www.cafc.uscourts.gov/opinions/08-1001.pdf>

[^uk_53]: There is no case in Scotland directly dealing with FOSS licences,
    but there is a useful (albeit *obiter dicta*) analysis in a case
    concerning proprietary software: *Profile Software Ltd v. Becogent
    Ltd (2005) ScotCS CSOH\_28 (16 February 2005)*. The same principles
    will apply to FOSS licences.

[^uk_54]: GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (GPL) version 3, article 10,
    [http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.\]&\#8221](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.</simpara></footnote>&#8221);
    and GPL version 2: “each time you redistribute the Program (or any
    work based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a
    license from the original licensor”[^uk_81].

    In this way the user of the software obtains a license from all
    authors in the tree.

    Users of GPL programs (such as the Linux kernel) may, therefore, be
    operating under a large number of parallel licences, each granted by
    an individual author of the underlying work.

    Licences such as the MIT and BSD do not contain such explicit
    wording, and it is probably easiest to consider that the right
    granted to the licensee includes the right to sub-license, so the
    end-user is receiving a single licence to the software from his or
    her immediate licensor, which, in respect of the parts of the work
    of which the licensor is not the owner, are sub-licensed to the
    licensee by the licensor. There are no judicial interpretations of
    this issue under English or Scots law, and it is not clear what the
    effect may be. However, one consequence may be that under English
    Law, if a licensor successfully argues that he can withdraw a bare
    licence on notice (and the doctrine of promissory estoppel is found
    inapplicable)[^uk_82], then a licensee under a sub-licence (which was
    granted when the original licence was still in force) will be better
    protected against withdrawal than a licensee receiving a number of
    parallel licences, one of which is withdrawn. It is also the case
    that if (as discussed below) a licensee has a claim against the
    licensor for a defect in the software, that the licensor will be
    better protected in circumstances where there is a large number of
    parallel licences, as opposed to their being one licence between the
    licensor and the licensee.

[^uk_55]: OSD Clause 10.

[^uk_56]: Insolvency Act 1986

[^uk_57]: Or, in Scotland, delict or negligence.

[^uk_58]: *Caparo Industries plc v Dickman* (1990) 2 AC 605

[^uk_59]: See e.g., the BSD license
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license>): “THIS SOFTWARE
    IS PROVIDED BY &lt;copyright holder&gt; **AS IS** AND ANY EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL &lt;copyright holder&gt; BE LIABLE
    FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
    BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
    NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
    SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.”

[^uk_60]: B., PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”, *Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution*, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>.

[^uk_61]: See e.g., M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in *Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35.

[^uk_62]: The GNU General Public License expressly allows this (GPL v. 2,
    art. 11; GPL v. 3, art. 7).

[^uk_63]: An outcome which may be more likely in Scotland than in England

[^uk_64]: <http://www.bis.gov.uk/files/file22866.pdf>

[^uk_65]: Consumer Protection Act 1987 Section 4(c)

[^uk_66]: Neither the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software movement,
    nor the Open Source Definition mandate the copyleft clause. Many
    FOSS licenses do not contain a copyleft clause. Examples are the
    Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license and the Academic Free
    License.

[^uk_67]: E.g., GPL version 3 Art. 5 stipulates: “You must license the
    entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into
    possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with
    any applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work,
    and all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License
    gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but it
    does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received
    it.” GPL version 2 Art. 2 b stipulates: “You must cause any work
    that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or
    is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a
    whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this
    License”.

[^uk_68]: It has been argued that some licences, for example the GPL, try
    to impose obligations which impose on works which are connected with
    the relevant work in a way which is more remote than a derivative
    work: for example, through linking. This issue is beyond the scope
    of this chapter.

[^uk_69]: The European Union Public Licence, for example, permits
    re-licensing under the GPL instead of its own terms.

[^uk_70]: For example, an action to enforce a promise of marriage

[^uk_71]: Such as a contract to grant a lease of land which the party does
    not own; or to sell the Forth Bridge — at any rate by anyone other
    than Network Rail

[^uk_72]: For example, against a foreigner who is furth (i.e. out) of the
    jurisdiction and who would not be available to have sanctions, such
    as imprisonment for contempt of court, enforced against him.

[^uk_73]: It does not follow logically that the capital value of piece of
    software is diminished by an amount equal to the cost of a
    proprietary licence each time the software is distributed in
    infringement of that licence, but courts have been persuaded to
    award damages on this basis, ignoring the stricter “diminution in
    value” rule.

[^uk_74]: *American Cyanamid -v- Ethicon Ltd.* (1975) RPC 513

[^uk_75]: Formerly known as an Anton Piller order after *Anton Piller KG* v
    *Manufacturing Processes Ltd* (1976) Ch.55

[^uk_76]: Not to be confused with the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom,
    to which an appeal lies from the Inner House of the Court of
    Session).

[^uk_77]: Petition procedure is not likely to be applicable in a typical
    intellectual property case

[^uk_78]: The proper name for Court of Session judges.

[^uk_79]: “Barristers” is the name given to Advocates in England

[^uk_80]: More properly, a Solicitor having rights of audience in the Court
    of Session

